Title: Integrating Histology with Spatial Molecular Programs Using a Multimodal Foundation Model

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 74

Markdown Content:
1

# Integrating Histology with Spatial Molecular Programs Using 

# a Multimodal Foundation Model 

# Authors and Affiliations 

Zongxu Zhang 1, *, Bowen Qin 1, *, Yahui Zhao 2, *, Zekun Qi 3, Hanlin Xu 1, Yunfeng Wang 4, Wenjin Zheng 5,

Jiateng Dai 1, Anxin Chen 1, Nachuan Wang 1, Lanxi Nie 6, Peng Zhang 1, Haorui Zhang 1, Yanping Zhao 7, Tian 

Xu 4, Siyu Lin 4, Pengfei Ren 4, Zhe Zhang 8, Liyan Xue 9, Xuemin Xue 9, Zhaoyang Yang 9, Jiaqi Xu 9, Jiahao Ma 4,

Deng Pan 10 , Cunyu Wang 11,12 , Zhihua Liu 2,# , Yuanguang Meng 8,# , Zexian Zeng 1,4,13,# 

> 1

Center for Quantitative Biology, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 

100084, China. 

> 2

State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Center, National Clinical Research Center for 

Cancer, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 

100021, China. 

> 3

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 

> 4

Peking -Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking 

University, Beijing 100084, China. 

> 5

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chinese PLA Medical School, Beijing 100853, China. 

> 6

National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, 

Beijing 100081, China. 

> 7

Tsinghua -Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 

China. 

> 8

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seventh Medical Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 

100700, China. 

> 9

Department of Pathology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer 

Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China 

> 10

Tsinghua -Peking Center for Life Sciences, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Tsinghua University, 

Beijing 100084, China 

> 11

Beijing Advanced Center of Cellular Homeostasis and Aging -Related Diseases, Institute of Advanced Clinical 

Medicine, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

> 12

Department of Pedodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing 100081, China 

> 13

Peking University Chengdu Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Biotechnologies, Chengdu, Sichuan 

610213, China. 

*These authors contributed equally 

> #

Correspondence to:  liuzh@cicams.ac.cn  (Z.L.),  mengyuanguang@301hospital.com.cn  (Y.M.), 

zexianzeng@pku.edu.cn  (Z.Z.) 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

# Abstract 

Histopathological assessment remains central to cancer diagnosis and stratification, yet its mechanistic interpretation 

remains limited without molecular context. To address this, we developed S QUALL , a multimodal foundation model 

integrating histology with spatial molecular programs. For pretraining, w e assembled histMol , a large -scale corpus of 

1.76 billion paired histology -spatial transcriptomics spots/bins across 33 tissues and 12 platforms from 3,446 tissue 

sections . Following pretraining, SQUALL enables transcriptome -wide virtual biomarker profiling, prognostically 

relevant spatial niche s discovery, and integrative disease progression modeling. Leveraging its multimodal embeddings, 

SQUALL identifies niches associated with tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS) maturation and ovarian cancer relapse, 

reconstructs molecular trajector ies of breast cancer invasion across 325,112 spots, and uncovers underlying 

transcriptional programs. Applied to whole -slide images from 898 patient s, SQUALL outperforms existing pathology 

foundation models in outcome prediction while enabling interpretable risk stratification. Together, these results establish 

spatially aligned multimodal pretraining as a new paradigm for extending molecular insights in to pathology images .

# Keywords 

Spatial transcriptomics; Computational pathology; Histopathology; Multimodal learning; Foundation model; Tumor 

microenvironment s; Tertiary lymphoid structure s; Prognostics modeling; Whole -slide images .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3

# Introduction 

Cancer diagnosis and treatment continue to rely heavily on tissue -based assessment. Among available clinical modalities, 

histopathological review of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) -stained sections remains the cornerstone of cancer diagnosis, 

grading, and risk stratification 1,2 . By resolving tissue architecture, cellular morphology, and tumor -stroma organization, 

histology provides a direct view of disease states in their native context and guides routine clinical decision -making. 

Yet despite its central role, histology is inter preted largely through morphology and offers only indirect access to the 

molecular programs that drive tumor progression, therapeutic response, and immune interactions. This disconnect 

creates a fundamental gap between histological phenotypes used in pathology and the molecular programs that govern 

tumor biology. 

Advances in molecular profiling have transformed understanding of cancer by enabling systematic characterization of 

gene expression programs, signaling pathways, and cellular composition. Bulk and single -cell sequencing studies have 

identified biomarkers a ssociated with tumor progression 3, metastatic potential 4, treatment response 5, and patient 

outcome 6. However, these approaches often require tissue dissociation or homogenization, disrupting the spatial 

organization of tumors and their surrounding microenvironments 7. As a result, molecular information is frequently 

detached from the histological structures through which disease is diagnosed and interpreted in clinical practice 8.

Spatial transcriptomics technologies , as a conceptual convergence of histological imaging and molecular sequencing 9,10 ,

have begun to bridge this divide by enabling simultaneous measurement of gene expression and tissue morphology 

within intact sections. These approaches allow molecular programs to be mapped back onto histological architecture, 

providing a spatially resolv ed view of tumor states 11 , stromal organization 12 -14 , and immune niches 15,16 . As spatial 

transcriptomics technologies continue to expand in scale and resolution 17,18 , rapidly growing collections of paired 

histology and spatial molecular profiles offer a unique opportunity to connect molecular states with the image -based 

readouts that remain ubiquitous in clinical pathology .

In parallel, foundation models trained on large biomedical datasets have emerged as a powerful framework for 

representation learning 19 -21 . In computational pathology, large vision models trained on histology images have improved 

tasks such as tumor classification, subtyping, and prognostic prediction from whole -slide images 22 -24 . However, most 

existing pathology foundation models remain image -centric, learning visual patterns from histology alone or aligning 

histology with text annotations. Without direct supervision from spatially resolved molecular states within matched 

tissue sections, these models remain limited in their ability to recover the biological programs underlying histological 

phenotypes or to generalize mechanistic insight across datasets and platforms. 

Here, we present SQUALL , a 555 -million -parameter multimodal foundation model trained on paired histology and 

spatial transcriptomics designed to integrate tissue morphology with molecular states. To enable large -scale multimodal 

pretraining, we assembled histMol , a corpus of 1.76 billion spots and bins from 33 tissues across 12 spatial 

transcriptomics platforms from 3 ,446 tissue sections spanning diverse imaging and sequencing resolutions. We reasoned 

that direct learning the alignment between routine histology and spatially resolved molecular profiles allow latent gene 

expression -relevant programs embedded in tissue morphology to become accessible . Across diverse tissues and tumor 

types, SQUALL recovers these programs and links them to tumor progression , immune organization , and clinical 

outcomes. Through stage -wise self -supervised training, SQUALL supports large -scale virtual biomarker profiling 

across independent cohorts, scaling to 15,757 genes, and identifies spatial niches associated with prognostic features ,

including TLS maturation . Using SQUALL -derived representations, we further uncover invasion -associated molecular 

trajectory in breast cancer from 325,112 spots across 198 sections and identify a relapse -associated immune -excluded 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

niche in ovarian cancer from VisiumHD sections of 58 patient s. When applied to whole -slide images, SQUALL 

improves prognosis prediction in 793 patients and yields more balanced predictive performance for platinum -based 

chemotherapy treatment resistance in 213 patients. Together, these findings establish multimodal spatial representation 

learning as a scalable framework for connecting histopathology with tumor biology and extending molecular insights to 

histopathological tissue imaging at scale. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5

# Results 

Collection and preprocessing of the histMol corpus 

To enable multimodal pretraining integrating tissue histolog ical morphology with spatial molecular programs, we 

assembled histMol , a large -scale corpus of paired histology and spatial transcriptomics data spanning 33 tissues, 12 

platforms, 3,446 tissue sections , and various spatial resolutions (Fig ure 1A ; Figure S1 A-H; Table S1 -S7 ). histMol 

aggregates 1.76 billion sequencing spots /bins from 15 public repositories (322 studies ; Table S1 ) together with newly 

generated in -house datasets. The corpus integrates major spatial transcriptomics technologies , including Visium 10 , ST 25 ,

VisiumHD 26 , OpenST 27 , Nova -ST 28 , Seq -Scope 29 , and Stereo -seq 30 , paired with matched H&E histology from the same 

tissue sections (Table S 2). In total, histMol spans a range of anatomical sites across human, mouse, and xenograft 

models across various experimental protocols (Table S2 -S4), providing a diverse resource for multimodal representation 

learning (Figure 1B ).

To enable cross -species learning, we defined a shared gene space of 15,757 one -to -one human -mouse orthologs (Figure 

S1A ) that uniformly cover all cytobands (Figure S1B ). Compared with large -scale single -cell datasets such as 

Gene corpus -30M 31 , spatial transcriptomics profiles were markedly sparse (Figure S1C ). Across platforms, sequencing 

library size strongly correlated with the number of detected genes per spot or bin (mean Pearson’s r = 0.98 ; Figure S1D ),

indicating that the biological signal is primarily driven by gene detection rather than expression magnitude. We therefore 

binarized gene expression to preserve informative presence -absence signals while improving modeling efficiency. 

To capture complementary spatial scales, histMol was partitioned into histMol -low and histMol -high subsets based on 

imaging and sequencing resolution (Figure S1E ). Low -resolution datasets provide broad coverage for learning global 

morphology -molecular relationships (Figure S1F ; Table S5 and S6 ), whereas high -resolution assays capture fine -

grained microanatomical correspondence (Table S7). We developed resolution -specific preprocessing procedures for 

each subset , including color normalization 32 , pseudo -labeling (Figure S2 A-E). , and texture mapping (Figure S2 F-L).

The final corpus comprises 6,194,156 spots from 3,243 histMol -low sections sourced from 1,952 tissue blocks , together 

with 1,640,264,658 bins from 203 newly generated histMol -high sections sourced from 195 tissue blocks (Figure 1A ,

Tab le S1 ), representing a significant expansion over the previous dataset HEST -1k 33 and STimage -1K4M 34 (Figure 

S1 G). After preprocessing, we obtained 74,773 low -resolution tiles and 580,934 high -resolution tiles (Figure S1 H).

Together, these data establish histMol as a large -scale resource for multimodal learning in spatial biology. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

Figure 1 | SQUALL is a multimodal foundation model integrates histology with molecular program s

A. Assembly of the histMol corpus used for multimodal pretraining. Public spatial transcriptomics datasets and newly generated in -

house samples were integrated. Only samples with matched H&E histology and spatial transcriptomics from the same section were 

retained, resulting in a co rpus comprising 1.76 billion sequencing spots or bins. 

B. Overview of histMol . The dataset spans 33 anatomical tissues across human, mouse, and xenograft models and integrates multiple 

spatial transcriptomics technologies. 

C. Overview of the SQUALL architecture. Paired histology and spatial transcriptomics inputs are jointly encoded through 

complementary masking and multimodal transformer blocks to learn shared representations linking tissue morphology and gene -

expression programs. 

D. Stage -wise multimodal pretraining of SQUALL on histMol across spatial resolutions. Low -resolution datasets capture global 

morphology -molecular relationships, whereas high -resolution datasets refine microanatomical correspondence. 

E. Downstream applications enabled by SQUALL across multiple spatial scales, including spatial spot analysis, tile -level 

microenvironment s profiling, and whole -slide histology modeling. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9

Figure S1 | Overview of the histMol pretraining corpus. Related to Figure 1. 

A. Ideogram showing the genomic distribution of 15,757 one -to -one human –mouse orthologous genes retained in the histMol corpus. 

B. Scatter plots showing distribution of gene locations across cytobands in human ( Top ) and mouse ( Bottom ). 

C. Comparison of non -zero gene expression between the histMol corpus (Visium, ST, and VisiumHD subsets) and droplet -based 

scRNA -seq data (GeneCorpus -30M). Distributions are summarized by the mean, median, and interquartile range (IQR). 

D. Boxplots showing Pearson correlation coefficients between library size (total UMI) and non -zero gene count across major spatial 

transcriptomics platforms in histMol , with ( Left ) and without ( Right ) log -normalization. Box plots: center line, median; box limits, 

upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. 

E. Bar plot showing the composition of the histMol corpus, with the distribution of training data tiles per section across platforms. 

Data are stratified into histMol -low (left) and histMol -high (right) according to their imaging resolution. 

F. Scatter plot showing distribution of histology image resolution across platforms in the histMol -low dataset. 

G. Bar plot comparing the data volume of histMol corpus with HEST -1k and STimage -1K4M. Comparison were performed across 

platforms including VisiumHD, Visium, and ST on tissue sections and sequencing spots. 

H. Bar plot showing tile -level tissue statistics for the histMol -low ( Left ) and histMol -high ( Right ) components. Raw tissue sections 

were preprocessed and partitioned into tiles for model training. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11 

Figure S2 | Data preprocessing pipeline of histMol . Related to Figure 1. 

A-E. Preprocessing of histMol -low component. 

A. Background white -balance correction improves histology image quality. Representative examples before and after correction are 

shown, with stain vectors estimated using the Vahadane method. Scale bar, 2 mm. 

B. Schematic of pseudo -labeling to construct a grid -like data structure. Original sequencing spots were divided into sub -spots (4×4 

pixels), and inter -spot gaps were filled using nearest -neighbor interpolations. 

C. Spatial plot showing an example from histMol -low data with white -balanced H&E image (Left ), library size (total UMI) 

(Middle ), and non -zero gene counts ( Right ). 

D. Spatial plot showing sub -spot -level library size and non -zero gene number after pseudo -labeling by nearest -neighbor 

interpolation of ( C). 

E. Spatial plot showing sub -spot level library size and non -zero gene counts after imputed by bilinear and bicubic interpolation 

methods of ( C). These smoothing -based interpolation produce checkerboard -like pattern artifacts (red boxes), owing to over -

smoothing of expression between spots. 

Scale bar for C-E: 1 mm. 

F-L. Preprocessing of histMol -high component. 

F. Schematic of the texture mapping process used to align sequencing bins with histology pixels in histMol -high data. This process 

includes grid generation to create an aligned image pixel grid at the desired resolution (Step1), followed by texture mapping to align 

the original image pixels (Step2). 

G. Histology image showing an example of unaligned histology image and the corresponding spatial transcriptomics sequencing 

grid. Raw image tile (224 × 224 pixels) from histMol -high (Left ). Zoomed -in views of a plasma cell within the tile, with arrows 

highlighting the misalignment between the two data modalities ( Middle ). A further zoomed -in view showing the misalignment 

between the original image pixels and the sequencing bin grid (with bold lines indicate unaligned bin borders) ( Right ). Scale bars: 

10 μm (tile), 2 μm (zoom -in). 

H. Spatial plot of gene expression from unaligned data. With MUC2 marking normal colon goblet cells and IGHG1 marking plasma 

cells. 

I. Texture mapping aligns image pixels and sequencing grids across 5× (Left ), 10× ( Middle ), and 20× (Right ) magnifications. 

Arrows indicate aligned bin borders and corners. Scale bars: 10 μm (tile), 2 μm (zoom -in). 

J. Spatial plot of gene expression after texture mapping. Shown are the same region and genes as in ( H). 

K. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of MUC2 and IGHG1 from the Human Protein Atlas ( https://www.proteinatlas.org/ ) was 

used to verify correspondence between gene expression and histology after texture mapping. Scale bars: 20 μm (IHC), 10 μm (ti le). 

L. Scalability analysis of texture mapping. Processing time and memory scale with pixel count, resulting in quadratic growth wit h

respect to image resolution. Shaded areas indicate 95% confident interval (n = 3 runs). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

SQUALL architecture, multimodal pretraining, and ablation analysis 

Using histMol , we developed SQUALL , a multimodal foundation model designed to integrate histological morphology 

with spatial gene -expression programs (Figure 1C). Theoretically grounded by masked data modeling 35,36 (Methods ;

Figure S3A ), SQUALL learns joint representations from paired histology and spatial transcriptomics by masking 

complementary regions across modalities and reconstructing missing signals (Figure S3B ), allowing the model to 

capture both morphological structure and spatial molecular context. The architecture combines modality -specific feature 

extraction with shared multimodal fusion layers 37 , enabling joint learning while supporting histology -only inference for 

downstream analyses (Figure S3 C).

To accommodate the diverse spatial resolutions present across technologies, despite explicitly encodin g resolution and 

spatial coordinate 38,39 (Methods ; Figure S3D ), we utilized a stage -wise continual pretraining strategy (Figure 1D). In 

the first stage, SQUALL was pre trained on low -resolution tiles to learn global morphology -molecular alignment. In the 

second stage, pre training continues on high -resolution tiles to refine fine scale microanatomical correspondence. This 

strategy produces a unified model capable of supporting analyses across spatial scales, from sequencing spots to whole -

slide histopathology images (Figure 1E ).

Ablation analyses identified several factors contributing to model performance (Figure S3E-S3I; Table S 8-S23 ).

Combining absolute and relative positional encodings achieved the highest accuracy (Figure S3F; 66 .3%), 

outperforming absolute -only (65 .9%), relative -only (54 .2%), or no positional encoding (59 .5%). Increasing model 

capacity, training duration, and dataset diversity further improved performance (Figure S3F). Stain normalization 

slightly decreased model performance, whereas pretraining with mouse tissues and multi -platform data improved 

classification accuracy compared with training on human -only or Visium -only data. (Figure S3G). For high -resolution 

tasks (Figure S3H), stage -wise pretraining achieved the best performance ( Figure S3I; 77.8%), exceeding models 

trained on histMol -low only (70.6%) or histMol -high only (75.9%). Using the optimized training protocol (Table S 24 

and S25 ), SQUALL converged robustly during pretraining (Figure S3J). Visualization of the masked -token 

reconstruction results showed that the model captured salient histological features and gene -expression patterns (Figure 

S3K), enabl ing SQUALL ’s encoder to generate high -quality multimodal embeddings that support a broad range of 

downstream biological and clinical applications. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14 

Figure S3 | SQUALL model architecture, ablation studies, and training details. Related to Figure 1. 

A-D. Architecture of SQUALL . Paired H&E images and spatial transcriptomics profiles are encoded using modality -specific MLP 

layers and integrated through shared transformer layers resembling a mixture -of -modality experts design ( A, C). During pretraining, 

tokens from each modality are reconstructed through cross -modal attention ( B). Both absolute and relative positional encodings are 

incorporated into the attention layers ( D). 

E. Section -level classification probing task used to evaluate representation quality and perform ablation analyses. 

F. Ablation study of SQUALL model configurations. Effect of position information encoding strategies (Left) . Effect of model size 

and training duration (Right) . All variants were evaluated using the tissue classification task; bars show classification accuracy. 

Error bars, ± 95% confidence interval. PE, position embedding; RPB, relative position bias; w/ res, with resolution as constr aint; 

w/o, without; Acc., Ac curacy. 

G. Bar plots summarizing additional model training ablation results. Mask ratio refers to the proportion of masked image pixels 

(Left ). Stain normalization was performed using the Marchenko method with a median color vector from histMol -low ( Middle ). 

Including mouse tissues and multiple low -resolution platforms improved accuracy ( Right ). Error bars, ± 95% confidence interval. 

H. Tissue -region classification probing task used to evaluate stage -2 training. 

I. Ablation on SQUALL stage -wise training. Region classification accuracy evaluated at various pretraining stages. Error bars, ± 

95% confidence interval. 

J. Training curves for stage 1 ( Top ) and stage 2 ( Bottom ) show reconstruction losses for histology (blue), spatial transcriptomics 

(red), and total (black). Dashed grey lines indicate total training duration. Init., initiation; tot., total; recon., reconst ruction; Expr., 

expression. 

K. Representative samples reconstructions at different training stages. Init., initiation; tot., total; recon., reconstruction; Expr., 

expression. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15

SQUALL enables high -fidelity virtual spatial biomarker profiling from routine histology 

Given the widespread availability and low cost of histology relative to molecular profiling, virtual inference of clinically 

relevant molecular biomarkers from routine H&E images offers an attractive approach for clinical assessment 9,40 .

Following large -scale multimodal pretraining of SQUALL on paired histology -spatial transcriptomics data to link tissue 

morphology with molecular programs, we next tested whether it could perform virtual biomarker profiling directly from 

clinical -grade, high -resolution histology images. After pretraining, the histology encoder and transcriptomics decoder 

were frozen, and spatial gene expression profiles were predicted from histology in a single forward pass (Figure 2A).

We benchmarked SQUALL on both internal and external Xenium5K datasets ( Table S 26 ) to evaluate its performance 

in virtual gene expression prediction using previous reported benchmark methods 41 . Xenium5K was selected as the 

evaluation platform for a recent benchmarking study reported its higher sensitivity in spatial gene expression detection 42 ,

and because the datasets cover tissue regions at whole -section scale. For competing method s training, ovarian cancer 

and hepatocellular carcinoma VisiumHD sections from SPATCH were used to train all competing methods, which were 

then applied to internal hepatocellular carcinoma adjacent Xenium5K tissue section and external datasets for inference. 

In contrast, SQUALL was kept frozen and directly applied to all Xenium5K -profiled tissue sections ’ histology images 

in both the internal and external evaluations, thereby controlling for differences in data exposure across methods. For 

external evaluation, ovarian and cervical cancer sections from different patients, obtained from 10x Genomics and not 

used during pretr aining of SQUALL or training any other competing method s, were used to assess generalization under 

data -independent conditions. iSTAR 41 , ST -Net 43 , EGN 44 , Hist2ST 45 , DeepPT 46,47 , and Path2Space 48 were trained 

separately on the internal VisiumHD sections following their originally reported training architectures and protocols to 

ensure a standardized and fair comparison, whereas SQUALL was evaluated in a zero -shot setting, with both its 

decoupled image encoder and expression decoder kept frozen (Methods ; Table S 27).

Across all genes shared between Xenium5K and histMol (Table S 28 ), SQUALL achieved higher predictive accuracy 

than all comparators in both internal and external evaluations ( two -sided t -test, both comparison p-value < 0.001 )

(Figure 2B-C; Figure S 4A-S4C; Table S 29 and S30 ) with a n overall Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.428 ,

indicating that the pretrained SQUALL model surpasses current H&E -based direct spatial transcriptomic prediction 

models in predicting gene expression from histology alone. Performance improvements were consistent across 

biomarker classes, including transcription factors , ligands and receptors, and membrane proteins ( Figure 2D; Table 

S31 and S3 2). 

Representative examples further illustrate the spatial accuracy of SQUALL predictions ( Figure 2E). In hepatocellular 

carcinoma, SQUALL showed improved spatial concordance for the growth factor receptor involved in invasion and 

metastasis MET (Figure 2E, first row), whereas in external ovarian carcinoma it faithfully recovered the immune 

signaling receptor IFNGR1 (Figure 2E, second row) and in external cervical carcinoma sections it shows better 

prediction results of STAT1 (Figure 2E , thrid row) , a canonical interferon -response regulator .

Having established accurate virtual biomarker pr ofiling performance , we next examined whether SQUALL could enable 

cohort -scale virtual molecular profiling directly from whole -slide histology. Using SQUALL , we predicted the spatial 

expression of 15,757 genes from whole -slide images and linked these virtual biomarkers to clinical outcomes (Figure 

2F). In the TCGA -LIHC cohort, multivariable Cox regression revealed that immune activation programs were 

associated with prolonged survival, whereas invasion -related β -catenin/TCF signaling, key mediator s of canonical Wnt 

signaling, together with angiogenesis pathways, was associated with increased risk (Figure 2G).

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16

We next investigated whether spatial patterns of virtual biomarkers provide prognostic information. Using publicly 

available tumor region annotations 49 (Figure 2H), SQUALL accurately recovered the spatial expression patterns of 

cervical cancer -associated differentially expressed genes and transcription factor programs 50 in whole -slide images from 

TCGA -CESC patients (Figure S4J). Linking predicted gene expression to spatial regions to assess patient survival 

status revealed that DNA double -strand break repair programs were associated with elevated risk (Figure 2I and 2J), 

whereas immune response pathways, including germinal center formation and chemokine activity, correlated with 

prolonged survival (Figure 2J).

Of note, T cell activation also emerged as a protective signal in this cohort (Figure 2J). Although T cell infiltration is 

broadly associated with favorable outcomes across cancers, the spatial determinants linking CD8⁺ cytotoxic activity to 

prognosis in cervical cancer remain unclear 51 . SQUALL -based virtual biomarker profiling revealed that both CD4⁺ and 

CD8⁺ T cell programs were preferentially localized within tumor regions ( Figure S4D). Further stratification showed 

enrichment of both effector and exhausted CD8⁺ T cell states within tumors (Figure S 4E-F). Importantly, intratumoral 

CD8⁺ T cell signatures were significantly associated with prolonged survival and demonstrated stronger prognostic 

value (Hazard Ratio = 0.44, one -sided Wald test, p-value = 0.003) than scores computed across the entire slide or 

restricted to non -tumor regions, as well as clinical variables such as stage and age (Figure 2K). Spatial analysis further 

revealed that long -term survivors exhibited prominent intratumoral CD8⁺ infiltration, whereas short -term survivors 

showed immune accumulation primarily at the tumor -stroma interface (Figure 2L), indicating that intratumoral CD8⁺ 

immune activity is a key spatial determinant of prognosis in cervical cancer. Together, these results show that SQUALL 

adds a spatial dimension to prognostic evaluation by resolving the tissue localization of immune programs, thereby 

extending molecular insight from spatial profiling to histology. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18 

Figure 2 | Virtual biomarker profiling from histology by SQUALL reveals spatial immune programs linked to survival 

A. Workflow for predicting spatial gene -expression programs directly from histology images using SQUALL .

B. Benchmarking of virtual biomarker prediction on internal and external Xenium5K sections. SQUALL was benchmarked against 

ST -Net, iSTAR, EGN, EGNv2, and Path2Space on three Xenium5K sections. Performance was evaluated using Pearson correlation 

on ( Left ) per tissue sections and ( Right ) overall correlations. HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; OC: ovarian carcinoma; CC: cervical 

carcinoma. Box plots: center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range; statist ical test: 

two -sided Mann -Whitney U test .

C. Pairwise scatterplots comparing per -gene Pearson correlations between SQUALL (x -axis, one panel per method) and each of six 

competing methods. 

D. Bar plot showing reverse ranking results of prediction performance across biomarker subsets. Prediction performance was inver se 

ranked within each section by average Pearson correlation, with higher rank indicates better performance. 

E. Representative virtual biomarker predictions. Left to right: original histology images (20× magnification) and virtually prof iled 

expression of selected genes from all competing methods and SQUALL . Rows show ground truth and predictions for MET (HCC, 

internal), IFGR1 (OC, internal), and STAT1 (CC, external). Scale bar, 1 mm. 

F. Schematic of SQUALL applied to virtual biomarker profiling directly using cohort -level histology whole -slides images. 

G. Bar plot showing GSEA results based on SQUALL -virtually profiled bulk gene expression in the TCGA -LIHC cohort. Genes 

were ranked by coefficients from a multivariable Cox regression model adjusted for age and stage. Pathways with NES > 0 are 

associated with poorer prognosis, whereas pathways with NES < 0 are associated with better prognosis. NES, normalized enrichment 

score. 

H. Spatial plot of representative annotated tumor regions from Chiara et al. Scale bar, 1 mm. 

I. Ranking plot of hazard ratios for SQUALL -virtually profiled gene expression within tumor regions of the TCGA -CESC cohort. 

Hazard ratios were estimated using multivariable Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for age and stage. Representative g enes 

are shown, including DNA double -strand break response (blue), DNA repair (orange), innate immune/complement regulation 

(green), and adaptive immune response (violet) genes. Solid dots indicate genes with FDR < 0.1. 

J. Ridge plot of gene set enrichment analysis based on SQUALL virtually profiled tumor region biomarkers on TCGA -CESC cohort. 

NES, normalized enrichment score. 

K. Hazard ratios for clinical variables and SQUALL -predicted CD8 + T cell signatures in the TCGA -CESC cohort, estimated using 

univariate Cox proportional hazards models. Dots indicate hazard ratios and bars indicate 95% confidence interval. Statistica l

significance was assessed using a one -sided Wald test. 

L. Representative examples of predicted CD8 + T cell infiltration in the TCGA -CESC cohort. Long -term survivor with predicted 

intertumoral CD8 + T cells (red dashed area) ( Left ). Short -term survivor with CD8 + cells mainly at the tumor margin ( Right ). Scale 

bar, 5 mm. 

Statistical significance: * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value < 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001; n.s., not significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Figure S 4 | Benchmarking SQUALL for virtual biomarker profiling. Related to Figure 2.

A-C. Quantitative comparison of SQUALL to iSTAR, ST -Net, EGN, Hist2ST, DeepPT, and Path2Space for virtual biomarker 

profiling using three Xenium5K sections. Pairwise scatterplots comparing per -gene Pearson correlations between SQUALL (x -axis, 

one panel per method) and each of six competing methods on one internal hepatocellular carcinoma section ( A), one external ovarian 

carcinoma section ( B), and one external cervical carcinoma section (C). 

D-E. Box plots showing predicted biomarkers expression. Cervical cancer -related differential genes and transcription factors ( D). 

T cell, CD4 + T cell, and CD8 + T cell signatures ( E, Left ). CD8 + T effector and exhaustion cell signatures ( E, Right ). Expression 

was normalized and ranked per tile within tissue section; higher ranks indicate higher predicted expression levels. 

F. Box plots comparing SQUALL -predicted T cell -related biomarker signature expression between tumor and non -tumor regions. 

Box plots ( D-F): center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range; statistical test: two -

sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Statistical significance: * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value < 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001; n.s., not significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

SQUALL resolves spatial pathological architecture and tumor -immune niches across tissues 

Accurate identification of microanatomical structures or domains is essential for interpreting spatial transcriptomics data 

and understanding tissue organization in cancer 52 . However, existing approaches depend on dataset -specific training or 

prior knowledge of tissue context 53,54 , which limits their generalizability and direct pathological interpretability. Given 

that SQUALL could integrate spatial molecular programs with r outine histology images, we next examined whether its 

frozen pretrained encoder could generate embeddings that directly capture spatially organized tissue architectures 

relevant to prognosis in spatial transcriptomics tissue sections (Figure 3A). 

We evaluated SQUALL across 36 sections from eight human tissues as internal evaluations : lung 55 , soft tissue 56 , breast 57 ,

pancreas 58 , liver 58,59 , cervix 60 , lymph node 58 , and head and neck 61 , using expert pathologist annotations as primary 

reference ( Table S 33 ). SQUALL was benchmarked against Leiden clustering on spatial transcriptomics data (Scanpy 62 ), 

K-means clustering on histology, and two multimodal methods, SpatialGlue 53 and MISO 54 . Notably, although SQUALL 

have been exposed to these datasets during pretraining, the SQUALL encoder was kept frozen throughout evaluation. 

In contrast, competing models were trained, fine -tuned, or applied separately to each dataset following the protocols 

reported in their original studies (Methods ; Table S 34 ). This setting ensured that competing models had dataset -

specific access to the same evaluation data, while SQUALL relied only on its frozen pretrained representations. Across 

all datasets, SQUALL consistently showed superior performance in tissue architecture annotation ( Figure 3B; two -

sided Mann -Whitney U test, p-value < 0.05 for all comparisons). Similar results were observed across individual cohorts 

(Figure S 5A), demonstrating robust generalization without dataset -specific retraining ( Table S 35 ). 

Beyond quantitative improvements, SQUALL resolved biologically meaningful tumor microenvironment niches linked 

to distinct molecular programs. In a hepatocellular carcinoma section ( Figure 3C), SQUALL is the only model that 

separated different tumor lineage and lymphoid aggregates regions within the same tissue ( Figure 3D). Hepatocellular 

carcinoma niche (niche 3) expressed ALB and showed more differentiated features , whereas niche 9 showed less 

differentiated morphology and represented a SOX9⁺ progenitor -like tumor niche marked by KRT7 and SOX9 expression 

(Figure 3E). An adjacent POSTN - and TAGLN -expressing compartment marked cancer -associated fibroblasts 

surrounding this SOX9⁺ progenitor -like tumor niche (Figure 3C and 3E). SQUALL also identified a tertiary lymphoid 

structure ( TLS ) with features consistent with a mature state characterized by plasma cell ( MZB1 , IGHG1 ), B cell 

(MS4A1 ), and T cell ( TRAC ) markers together with high -endothelial venule programs ( GCNT1 , FUT1 , SELPLG , SELE )

and lymphoid recruiting cytokine CXCL13 (Figure 3C and 3F). 

Analysis of the tumor niches subsequently revealed lineage -specific immune microenvironmen t. Hepatocellular tumor 

niche (niche 3) showed stronger immune infiltration ( Figure 3F and 3G), whereas SOX9⁺ progenitor -like niche (niche 

9) was marked by higher proliferation -related programs ( Figure 3G) surrounded by fibrotic stroma niche with higher 

COL1A1 expression, suggesting a stromal barrier that restricts immune infiltration into the tumor parenchyma ( Figure 

3H). These findings indicate that lineage -dependent immune exclusion, rather than TLS presence alone, may contribute 

to adverse outcomes in liver cancer. 

SQUALL also uncovered microenvironmental heterogeneity in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Within the 

section, SQUALL simultaneously identified lymphoid aggregates and hemorrhagic regions (Figure 3I), two 

pathological features not jointly captured by other methods (Figure 3J). Hemorrhagic niche (niche 4) has high vascular 

injury and angiogenesis programs ( HBA1 , HMOX1 , PGF , NOTCH4 ), whereas lymphoid aggregate nich e (niche 10) has 

high expression of T cell, B cell, and plasma cell markers (Figure 3K). However, unlike the mature TLS observed in 

liver tumor section (Figure 3F), the ccRCC lymphoid aggregates niche lacked high -endothelial venule markers ( SELE, 

SELPLG , FUT1 , GCNT1 ), indicating an immature TLS -like state (Figure 3K).

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21

Spatial niche interaction analysis revealed a signaling network linking tumor, hemorrhagic, and myeloid niches that may 

constrain TLS maturation (Figure 3L). Tumor -hemorrhage interactions were enriched for vascular injury and 

angiogenesis pathways (e.g., VWF -ADAMTS13 , VEGFA -KDR /NRP1 ), suggesting that tumor -driven vascular 

remodeling promotes a hemorrhagic microenvironment. Both tumor and hemorrhagic niches further exhibited signals 

associated with suppressive tumor -associated macrophage (TAM) activation, including GAS6 -MERTK /AXL and 

HAVCR1 -SIGLEC1 . Although lymphoid -organizing interactions ( CCL19 /CCL21 -CCR7 ) were present between myeloid 

(niche 4) and TLS -like (niche 10) niches, these coexisted with inhibitory pathways such as IL10 -IL10RA , TREM2 -APOE ,

and HLA -DRA -LAG3 , consistent with a suppressive TAM -like state and an immunosuppressive microenvironment 63,64 .

Together, these results suggest that tumor -driven angiogenesis and hemorrhage promote suppressive myeloid signaling 

that overrides TLS -promoting cues, limit TLS maturation in ccRCC, and may be associated with poor prognosis. In 

addition, in internal evaluation, SQUALL also uniquely identified a fibrotic niche in human prostate cancer sections 

(Figure S 5B), a region typically linked to stromal fibrosis and prostate cancer progression 65 .

To test generalization, we evaluated SQUALL on 20 external sections, including mouse breast tumors 66 and human 

thyroid cancers 67 . These datasets had never been seen by SQUALL during pretraining and were derived from cohorts 

and studies distinct from those used for pretraining. To ensure a stringent generalization test, the SQUALL encoder was 

kept frozen for feature extraction throughout external evaluation, with no dataset -specific fine -tuning or adaptation. In 

contrast, competing models were trained and applied separately to each external dataset following the protocols reported 

in their original studies (Methods ). Together with the internal datasets, this evaluation spanned diverse physiological 

and pathological conditions (Table S 33 ). We next asked whether the spatial domains identified by each model could 

provide interpretable tissue organization that may help pathologists generate biological or diagnostic hypotheses. To 

this end, four board -certified pathologists performed a blinded e xternal evaluation, in which head -to -head comparisons 

ranked SQUALL as the top -performing model among all methods. (Figure 3M). SQUALL also achieved the highest 

mean opinion score ( Figure 5N; Figure S3C), indicating that its tissue architecture annotations were consistently 

preferred by experts (Table S 36 and S37 ).

In an external 4T1 mouse breast tumor section, SQUALL not only clearly delineated distinct pathological regions 

(Figure 3O and 3P) but also identified niche 6 as a necrosis -associated niche marked by differential expression of genes 

linked to hypoxia, stress response, and TNF -NFκB signaling ( Figure 3Q). This region exhibited prominent neutrophil 

infiltration and PMN -MDSC (polymorphonuclear myeloid -derived suppressor cells) -like signatures ( Figure 3R), 

indica ting that tumor necrosis promotes a neutrophil -driven immunosuppressive microenvironment that may impair 

anti -tumor immunity. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23 

Figure 3 | SQUALL resolves spatial tumor niches and immune microenvironments across cancers 

A. Workflow for tissue architecture annotation using SQUALL embeddings derived from paired histology and spatial 

transcriptomics data. 

B. Quantitative evaluation of tissue structure annotation across internal datasets. Boxplots show normalized mutual information 

(NMI), adjusted mutual information (AMI), and adjusted Rand index (ARI) comparing SQUALL with baseline methods. 

C. SQUALL annotates a human liver cancer section. ( Left ) Spatial plot of human liver section pathological annotations. This section 

was annotated with less differentiated tumor (red), moderate differentiated tumor (blue), and lymphoid aggregates (violet). ( Right )

Spatial plot of SQUALL ’s niches annotation. 

D. Comparison of annotation results across models, including Scanpy, K -means, SpatialGlue, and MISO. 

E. Spatial plots showing liver cancer lineage marker expression. ALB marks hepatocellular carcinoma, with the boundary of niche 

3 overlaid by blue dashed lines ( Left ). SOX9 marks progenitors -like tumor, with the boundary of niche 8 overlaid by red dashed 

lines ( Right ). 

F. Heatmap of representative marker genes across core SQUALL -defined niches. Color intensity indicates normalized gene 

expression levels. Prolif., proliferation; Hepa., hepatocellular; TLS, tertiary lymphoid structures; matur., maturation; HEV, high 

endothelial venules. 

G. Gene set enrichment analysis of distinct liver cancer niche identified by SQUALL , comparing niche 3 ( Left ) and niche 8 ( Right )

with the other niches. 

H. Spatial plot showing COL1A1 expression. COL1A1 marks tissue fibrosis and with arrows highlighting elevated expression at the 

boundary of niche 8. 

I. SQUALL annotates a human ccRCC section. ( Left ) Spatial plot of selected pathological annotations. These annotations highlight 

lymphoid aggregates (violet) and hemorrhagic regions (blue). ( Right ) Spatial plot of SQUALL ’s niche annotations. 

J. Comparison of annotation results across models, including Scanpy, K -means, SpatialGlue, and MISO. 

K. Heatmap of representative marker genes across core SQUALL -defined niches. Color intensity indicates normalized gene 

expression levels. Angiog., angiogenesis; Hemor., hemorrhagic; APC, antigen -presenting cells; TAM, tumor -associated 

macrophages; TLS, tertiary lymphoid structures; HEV, high endothelial venules. 

L. Spatial ligand -receptor interactions between niches. Key significant ligand -receptor pairs are shown. 

M. Bar plot showing the tissue annotation win/tie/loss rates of SQUALL compared with Scanpy, K -means, SpatialGlue, and MISO 

as evaluated by four independent pathologists on external evaluations. Green line highlighting SQUALL ’s mean winning rate 

against the other methods. 

N. Boxplot showing mean opinion score (MOS) of SQUALL and other methods. MOS was evaluated based on annotation quality 

rankings provided by the same four independent pathologists. 

O. SQUALL annotates a mouse 4T1 subcutaneous tumor model section. ( Left ) Spatial plot of selected pathological annotations 

highlighting necrotic spots (violet) and adjacent skins tissue (grey). ( Right ) Spatial plot of SQUALL ’s niche annotations. 

P. Spatial plot showing different annotation results from unimodal and multimodal models. Shown are results from Scanpy, K -

means, SpatialGlue, and MISO. 

Q. Scatter plot showing differential expressed genes compared niche 6 and other niches. Score represents the standardized Wilcox on 

rank -sum test statistic used to rank differentially expressed genes, with higher scores indicating stronger differential express ion. 

R. Bar plot showing gene set signature score compared niche 6 with other niches. Statistical significance was assessed using two -

sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Box plots ( B, N): center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range; statistical test: two -

sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Statistical significance: * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value < 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001; n.s., not significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Figure S 5 | Benchmarking SQUALL for tissue pathological annotation, related to Figure 3.

A. Annotation accuracy across tissues evaluated using normalized mutual information (NMI), adjusted mutual information (AMI), 

and adjusted Rand index (ARI), showing consistent improvements by SQUALL .

B. SQUALL annotation of a human prostate carcinoma section. Pathologist annotations highlight fibrotic regions ( Top left ). 

SQUALL uniquely identifies fibrotic regions compared with baseline methods. 

C. Box plot showing tissue annotation performance summarized by mean opinion score (MOS) from four pathologists, presented 

separately for each tissue. 

Box plots ( A, C): center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range; statistical test: two -

sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Statistical significance: * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value < 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001; n.s., not significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25

SQUALL reconstructs an invasion -associated molecular trajectory in breast cancer 

Having shown that SQUALL can resolve immune -related niches and tumor lineages, we next investigated whether it 

could capture progressive changes in tumor state associated with invasion . Breast cancer accounts for ~32% of newly 

diagnosed malignancies in women and remains the second leading cause of cancer -related mortality among females 68 .

Histopathologically, breast tumors exhibit substantial morphological and molecular heterogeneity, ranging from pre -

invasive lesions such as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive subtypes including invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), 

invasive lobular c arcinoma (ILC), and aggressive variants such as metaplastic breast cancer (MpBC) 69,70 . Although 

accumulating evidence suggests that tumor progression follows a continuum rather than discrete states 3,13 , the molecular 

programs accompanying this state transition remain incompletely characterized. We therefore used SQUALL ’s joint 

histology -spatial transcriptomics embeddings to reconstruct molecular trajectories and interrogate the associated 

transcriptional programs ( Figure 4A ). 

To this end, we assembled a spatial cohort comprising 233,219 spots from 111 Visium sections across 70 patients 

spanning five studies (of 55 μm resolution per spot ; Figure S6A ; Table S3 8). Spots were encoded using SQUALL to 

generate multimodal embeddings integrating histological morphology and spatial gene expression (Figure S6 B).

Matched H&E sections were also independently annotated by four experienced pathologists using a consensus 

hierarchical framework for evaluation (Figure S6 C and S6D ; Table S3 9 and S40 ).

To evaluate whether multimodal integration improved spatial representation, we compared SQUALL embeddings with 

alternative integration frameworks based on spatial transcriptomics alone including Harmony 71 and scVI 72 . Although 

SQUALL had been exposed to these datasets during pretraining, its encoder was kept frozen during evaluation. To 

ensure a fair comparison, Harmony and scVI were applied to the same data cohorts following their standard workflows, 

allowing each method dataset -specific access under its intended use setting. SQUALL produced embeddings that more 

faithfully preserved histopathological structure and spatial context compare d with alternatives , resulting in clearer 

separation of annotated tissue compartments. Projected onto UMAP space, spot embedding segregated into major 

histological compartments, including tumor parenchyma, stromal regions, tumor -stroma interfaces, normal parenchyma 

region , interstitial , and tumor -interstitial interface (Figure 4 B). These embedding s also separated different breast cancer 

subtypes , including DCIS, IDC, ILC, and MpBC (Figure 4 C), indicating that SQUALL captures both tissue 

microenvironment s organization and patient -level pathological subtyp e heterogeneity. 

Corresponding gene expression patterns supported the separations. CDH2 , which encodes N-cadherin , is a cell -adhesion 

molecule associated with invasive tumor migration through interstitial extracellular matrix 73 , corresponding to the 

tumor -interstitial region (Figure 4D , top ). KRT18 (which en co de s CK18) is a luminal epithelial marker and is commonly 

expressed in ILC 74 (Figure 4D, middle ). Also, adipose signature was preferentially expressed on interstitial regions 

(Figure 4D, bottom ). These results demonstrate that SQUALL -derived embeddings capture the pathology -informed 

spatial organization of molecular expression in breast cancer tissues. 

Unsupervised clustering of the embeddings identified 35 recurrent molecular states spanning different pathological 

subtypes (Figure 4E ). Cluster enrichment analysis revealed strong associations between clusters and specific 

histological compartments or tumor subtypes (Figure 4F ). These clusters corresponded closely to histological 

compartments (Figure S6 E and S6 F), with tumor -enriched clusters displaying hyperchromatic nuclei and high tumor 

cell density, stromal clusters exhibiting intermediate morphology, and interstitial clusters enriched for adipocyte -

associated programs and display ing lighter staining intensity . These findings indicate that SQUALL -derived molecular 

states align with pathological tissue architecture. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26

To investigate whether these states reflect disease progression, we performed diffusion pseudotime analysis 75 on tumor -

enriched clusters shared across pathological subtypes (Figure 4 F and 4G ). This analysis revealed a continuous 

transcriptional state space spanning spots from DCIS and invasive carcinomas (IDC/ILC) , extending toward more 

aggressive, MpBC -like states. (Figure 4 G). Notably, individual sections defined as a single pathological subtype often 

contained multiple SQUALL -derived clusters ( Figure 4H), indicating substantial spatial heterogeneity within 

conventionally annotated lesions. 

Genes positively correlated with progressive pseudotime were enriched for actin cytoskeleton organization and calcium 

signaling, indicating cytoskeletal remodeling and increased cellular motility during invasive transition ( Figure 4I, left). 

Representative genes following this trend included ACTN4 , an actin -binding protein involved in cytoskeletal 

reorganization and cell migration, CALM1 , a key mediator of calcium -dependent signaling, and CEBPB , a transcription 

factor implicated in tumor progression and inflammatory signaling ( Figure 4J , top ). Concurrent activation of 

PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling further suggests coordinated proliferative and metabolic reprogramming along the inferred 

invasion trajectory. 

Conversely, genes negatively correlated with pseudotime were enriched for cell adhesion and apoptosis pathways, 

consistent with progressive loss of epithelial adhesion and attenuation of tumor intrinsic survival and apoptotic programs 

during progression fr om DCIS to invasive carcinomas and toward s MpBC 76 (Figure 4I , right). Representative genes 

included PDCD4 , a tumor suppressor associated with apoptosis regulation, FN1 , a key extracellular matrix component 

involved in cell adhesion, and THBS1 , a matricellular protein linked to TGF -β signaling and microenvironmental 

remodeling ( Figure 4J , bottom ). Notably, genes declining along the invasion trajectory were enriched for TGF -β

receptor signaling, indicating progressive attenuation of tumor intrinsic TGF -β transcriptional programs during the 

invasion transition s.

Consistent with progression toward more aggressive tumor states, estrogen -response pathways also declined along 

invasion pseudotime ( Figure 4I , right), suggesting a shift from hormone -dependent transcriptional programs toward 

estrogen -independent growth states. This transition was accompanied by activation of alternative oncogenic pathways, 

including PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling, a molecular feature commonly associated with basal -like and triple -negative 

breast cancers 77 .

To further examine the relationship between intrinsic subtype and invasion state, we assigned molecular subtypes using 

a PAM50 classifier 78 applied to section -level pseudobulk expression profiles, which showed strong agreement with 

curated patient metadata (Cohen’s κ = 0.78 ; Figure S 6G). Within basal -like tumors, SQUALL revealed a significant 

progre ssive enrichment of trajectory clusters along pseudotime ( Figure 4K , top ; Kruskal -Wallis test, p-value < 0.01 ), 

indicating that subtype -specific transcriptional programs are tightly linked to the inferred invasion trajectory . Together, 

these findings show that SQUALL reconstructs a spatial molecular continuum of breast cancer progression and captures 

coordinated signaling changes underlying tumor invasion. We next validated this trajectory in an independent spatial 

transcriptomics cohort comprising 38,013 spots from 87 sections across 33 patients profiled at lower spatial resolution 

(100 μm ; Figure S6 H; Table S3 8). SQUALL embeddings again resolved major pathological compartments (Figure 

S6I -S6 K) and recapitulated the progressive enrichment of clusters along the invasion trajectory (Figure 4K , bottom ;

Kruskal -Wallis test, p-value < 0.01) .

Finally , gene signatures derived from pseudotime -associated programs stratified patients in an independent cohort 

(TCGA -BRCA) into prognostically distinct groups ( Figure S6L ), linking the SQUALL -derived invasion program to 

clinical outcomes. Within TNBC, higher expression of the SQUALL -derived invasion program was associated with 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

shorter survival (Figure 4L ), further corroborating the clinical relevance of this invasion -associated transcriptional 

program. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 28 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 29 

Figure 4 | SQUALL reconstructs a spatial molecular trajectory of breast cancer invasion 

A. Schematic of applying SQUALL to identify prognostically relevant features in human breast cancer using Visium and ST datasets. 

B. UMAP visualization comparing spot embeddings of breast cancer tissue sections derived from SQUALL . scVI, and Harmony, 

colored by pathologist -annotated regions. 

C. UMAP visualization of embeddings derived from SQUALL , colored by pathological subtypes. 

D. UMAP visualization of pathological region and subtypes marker genes expression and signature score projected onto the 

embedding space. Shown are CDH2 (marking tumor -interstitial region), KRT8 (marking invasive lobular carcinoma subtype), and 

adipose signature (marking interstitial region). 

E. UMAP visualization of clustering on SQUALL -derived spot embeddings, colored by cluster identity. 

F. Heatmaps showing cluster enrichment across breast cancer pathological regions ( Top ) and subtypes ( Bottom ). Clusters enriched 

in tumor parenchyma and across different subtypes are highlighted. Enrichment was assessed using one -vs -all analysis based on 

odds ratios with two -sided Fisher’s exact test. Crosses (×): FDR > 0.1. 

G. Diffusion map analysis of tumor spot clusters. Inferred trajectory delineating a continuous progression of spots from DCIS 

sections to invasive carcinoma sections , and further towards MpBC sections . Arrows indicate the progression direction. Each dot 

represents a spot, colored by cluster (as in E) ( Left ). Same trajectory but colored by diffusion pseudotime, initiated from in situ 

carcinoma sections spots ( Right ). 

H. Spatial plot of distinct tumor spot clusters distributions along the inferred breast cancer prognostic trajectory on represen tative 

tissue sections. 

I. Over -representation analysis of genes along the inferred prognostic trajectory. Top positively correlated genes ( Left ) and top 

negatively correlated genes ( Right ) are shown, with line plots indicating the enrichment of associated gene sets (rich factor). 

J. Line plot showing representative gene expression trends along the inferred prognostic trajectory. Shown are the top positivel y

correlated genes ( ACTN4 , CALM1 , and CEBPB ) and negatively correlated genes ( PDCD4 , FN1 , and THBS1 ). The dashed area 

represents ± 1.96 standard derivation. 

K. Box plot showing distribution of tumor clusters along the inferred prognostic trajectory within basal -like breast tumors. A 

progressive enrichment pattern consistent with the inferred trajectory is observed on both Visium and ST data. Statistical 

signific ance was assessed using two -sided Kruskal -Wallis test. 

L. Box plot showing distribution of trajectory -associated gene signature on TCGA -BRCA Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) 

subtypes. Statistical significance was assessed using two -sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Box plot ( K, L): center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 31 

Figure S6 | SQUALL identifies breast cancer prognostic trajectory from multimodal embeddings. Related to Figure 4. 

A. Scatter plot showing histology image resolution and tile counts (in log scale) across breast cancer Visium datasets. 

B. Schematic of the spot averaging process used to generate spot -level embeddings for hexagonal grids. 

C. Hierarchy of pathological annotations for breast cancer tissues based on consensus among three pathologists based on breast 

anatomical structures. Unknown, regions that cannot be assigned to a specific class. NA, regions with missing annotations. 

D. Spatial plot showing example of an annotated histology image with non -overlapping polygons representing different regions. 

The tissue histology image ( Left ) is annotated with different pathological regions ( Right ). Scale bar, 1 mm. 

E. Box plot showing histology image brightness across clusters enriched in different pathological regions. Box plot: center 

line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. 

F. UMAP visualization of SQUALL embeddings colored by pathological regions ( Left ). Representative histology images 

corresponding to spots in the SQUALL embedding space are shown ( Right ). 

G. Heatmap showing concordance between curated molecular subtypes and inferred PAM subtypes using spatial transcriptomics 

data. Ground -truth molecular subtypes were curated from the original publications and confirmed by pathologists. PAM50 subtypes 

were infe rred using pseudobulk spatial transcriptomics data. 

H. Scatter plot showing histology image resolution and tile counts (in log scale) across breast cancer ST datasets. 

I. UMAP visualization of the SQUALL -derived embedding space of ST tissue sections, colored by annotated pathological regions 

(Left ) and by K -means -derived clusters ( Right ). 

J. Heatmap showing cluster enrichment across pathological regions of ST data. Enrichment was assessed using one -vs -all analysis 

based on odds ratios with two -sided Fisher’s exact test. Crosses (×): FDR > 0.1. 

K. Heatmap showing correspondence between Visium and ST breast tissue clusters, measured by cosine similarity of cluster -wise 

mean feature vectors. 

L. Kaplan -Meier survival curves using top trajectory -correlated genes as a prognostic signature to stratify patient in the TCGA -

BRCA cohort. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence interval are shown. Statistical significance was assessed using log -rank test. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 32

SQUALL identifies a relapse -associated tumor adaptive -immune - excluded niche in ovarian cancer 

After establish ing that SQUALL can resolve tumor state transition s, we next asked whether it could identify spatial 

niche s associated with clinical outcomes . This is especially pertinent in advanced ovarian cancer, where nearly 75% of 

patients relapse within two years of initial therapy, but the spatial microenvironment underlying recurrence remains 

poorly defined. 

We applied SQUALL to a VisiumHD ovarian cancer cohort 79 (Table S41 ), representing each high -resolution tissue tile 

(112 μm × 112 μm) as a multimodal embedding summarizing the local tissue microenvironment s (Figure 5A ). Using 

the corresponding pathological annotations (Figure S 7A and S7B; Table S 20 ), we found that these embeddings 

organized tissue regions into a pathology -aware space closely aligned with expert histopathological annotations (Figure 

S7C and S7D).

Hierarchical clustering identified multiple recurrent spatial niches across tumors (Figure 5B and 5C). Among these, 

niche 15 was significantly enriched in patients who experienced relapse (FDR < 0.05 ). Genes upregulated in this niche 

were enriched for NF -κB signaling, DNA recombination, calcium transport, and lymphocyte apoptosis pathways 

(Figure 5D ). Given the context -dependent roles of NF -κB signaling in promoting tumor survival while impairing anti -

tumor immune responses 80,81 , these observations suggested that NF -κB -associated programs contribute to relapse 

through combined tumor -promoting and immune -suppressive effects. Consistent with this hypothesis, this niche 

displayed reduced CD3E expression , indicating decreased T cell abundance, together with elevated expression of BCL10 ,

an activator of NF -κB signaling 82 , and SHLD3 , a component of the Shieldin complex involved in DNA double -strand 

break repair ( Figure 5E). These molecular features point to a microenvironment characterized by tumor persistence 

coupled with local immune suppression. 

We therefore termed this spatial cluster the TAIE (tumor adaptive -immune excluded) niche. Morphological validation 

using joint cell segmentation and cell -type classification with CellViT++ 83 confirmed that TAIE regions contained 

significantly fewer inflammatory cells and a higher abundance of neoplastic cells compared with other tissue regions 

(Figure 5F ). At the patient level, tumors harboring TAIE niches exhibited increased tumor -cell fractions and tumor -

dominant compartments with minimal lymphocyte infiltration ( Figure 5F and 5G). Together, these results define the 

TAIE niche as a relapse -associated spatial microenvironment marked by tumor predominance, immune exclusion, and 

NF -κB -linked adaptive signaling in ovarian cancer. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 34 

Figure 5 | SQUALL facilitates clinically relevant feature discovery and outcome prediction across cancers 

A. Schematic of apply SQUALL to VisiumHD datasets for recurrence -associated niche discovery in human ovarian cancer. 

B. Clinical outcome distribution across the VisiumHD ovarian cancer cohort. Recurrence status ( Top ) and survival status ( Bottom )

are shown. 

C. Identification of the recurrence -associated niche (niche 15). Patient -level clinical outcome labels are shown (RECIST: CR, 

complete response; PR, partial response; cross mark [x], missing data; Recur., recurrence) ( Top left ). Heatmap of SQUALL -derived 

niche embeddings clustered by K -means using tissue tile [CLS] embeddings ( Bottom left ). Bubble plot showing regional 

enrichment across recurrence status and pathological annotations (Fisher’s exact test, FDR < 0.05) ( Right ). 

D. Bar plot showing Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment results of top up -regulated genes in niche 15. 

E. Boxplots comparing gene expression levels of CD3E , BCL10 , SHLD3 in niche 15 and the other niches. 

F. Boxplots comparing cell type composition in niche 15 with other niches. Niche 15 shows higher neoplastic and lower 

inflammatory cell fractions ( Left ). Patient -level comparison showing higher tumor cell fractions in patients contains niche 15 

(Right ). 

G. Spatial plot showing representative ovarian cancer tissue sections with and without niche 15. Spatial distribution of niches, with 

niche 15 highlighted ( Left ). Whole -section cell segmentation and classification were done by CellViT++. Examples of niche 15 and 

other niches with corresponding cell labels are shown (Right ).

H. Schematic of apply SQUALL to survival and treatment response prediction from cohort level H&E -stained whole -slide images. 

I. (Left ) Bar plot showing survival prediction as evaluated by concordance index (c -index) from fivefold cross -validation of overall 

performance and cohort -specific performanc e. SQUALL was benchmark against Virchow, PLIP, and UNI on four independent 

cohorts. Error bars, ±1 standard derivation. With performance gain of SQUALL included. (Right ) Hazard ratios for clinical variables 

and SQUALL or other baselines, estimated using multivariate Cox proportional hazards models for TCGA -CESC and univariate 

Cox proportional hazards models for In -house OV. Dots indicate hazard ratios and bars indicate 95% confidence interval. Statistical 

significance was assessed using a one -sided Wald test. 

J. Gene expression analysis along the SQUALL -derived risk scores. Correlation between gene expression and SQUALL -derived 

risk score in TCGA -CESC cohort, with patients ordered by risk score ( Left ). Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis of 

genes most positively (associated with increased risks) and negatively (associated with decreased risks) correlated with SQUALL -

derived risk scores ( Right ). 

K. Examples histology images evaluation for high - and low -risk patients in TCGA -CESC cohort. Whole -slide H&E -stained images 

(Left ), SQUALL -derived attention heatmap for survival prediction ( Middle ), and selected regions for mitotic figures quantification 

(Right ) are shown. 

L. Example of a low -risk patient, showing whole -slide image ( Left ), SQUALL attention heatmap ( Middle ), and zoomed -in regions 

with high (blue outlines) and low (gray outlines) attention scores, and selected region for pathological evaluation ( Right ). Scale 

bars: 2.5mm (WSIs), 100 μm for zoom -in regions. 

M. Bar plot showing performance of ovarian cancer platinum -based chemotherapy resistance predictions. SQUALL was benchmark 

against Virchow, PLIP, and UNI on two independent cohorts. SQUALL achieves higher F1 scores compared with other models 

(fivefold cross -validation, mean ± 1 standard derivation), indicate a more balanced prediction result. 

Box plots ( E, F) show median (center line), upper/lower quartiles (box limits), and whiskers extending to 1.5× IQR; statistical test: 

two -sided Mann -Whitney U test. 

Statistical significance: * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value < 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001; n.s., not significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Figure S7 | SQUALL identifies a relapse -associated niche in ovarian cancer using multimodal embeddings. Related to Figure 

5A -5G. 

A. Hierarchy of pathological annotations for female genital tract cancer sections based on consensus among three experienced 

pathologists. 

B. Representative pathological annotation areas. Scale bar, 500 μm. 

C. UMAP visualization of tile -level SQUALL -embeddings colored by pathological regions ( Top ) and patient identity ( Bottom ). 

D. UMAP visualization of tile -level SQUALL -embeddings colored by pathological regions ( Left ) and corresponding histology 

image tiles ( Right ). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 36

SQUALL improves whole -slide outcome prediction with biologically interpretable risk features 

Prognosis prediction remains challenging due to tumor heterogeneity, yet H&E -stained whole -slide images are 

universally available and integral to patient care 40 . We therefore evaluated the ability of SQUALL to leverage molecular 

information learned during multimodal pretraining for outcome prediction from routine histology. 

Using the pretrained SQUALL encoder without fine -tuning, we extracted tile -level representations from whole -slide 

images, aggregated them using an attention -based multiple instance learning framework, and trained Cox proportional 

hazards models for survival prediction (Figure 5H; Table S 42 ). All cohorts were held out from pretraining and had 

never been exposed to SQUALL or any competing foundation model, thereby providing an independent evaluation 

setting. Despite being pretrained on a comparatively modest corpus (~0.6 million paired histology -spatial 

transcriptomics tiles) relative to existing pathology foundation models trained on hundreds of millions or billions of 

images (UNI 23 , Virchow 84 , PLIP 85 ; Table S 43 and S44 ), SQUALL achieved the highest survival prediction performance 

across three independent cohorts comprising 898 patients with gynecologic and gastrointestinal cancers (Table S4 5-

S4 7). Across five -fold cross -validation at 20× magnification, SQUALL achieved a C -index of 0.6 07, outperforming 

UNI (0.5 38 ), PLIP (0.5 56 ) and Virchow (0.5 65 ) on evaluated female g ynecologic tumor cohorts (Figure 5I , left ) and 

shows increased performance on STAD cohorts (Table S4 8). P rognostics evaluation reveals SQUALL derived risk 

score remains a strong prognostic factor among clinical variables and other models ( Figure 5I , right ). 

Beyond metric gain s, SQUAL L produced interpretable risk signals linked to tumor biology. In the in -house ovarian 

cancer cohort, attention maps preferentially localized to tumor regions compared with those produced by competing 

models (Figure S8 A). In TCGA -CESC, SQUALL uniquely stratified survival risk among early -stage (stage I/II) 

patients ( Hazard Ratio = 2.49 , two -sided Wald test, p-value < 0.05; Figure S8 B), a clinically important setting in which 

prognostic discrimination is limited. 

To probe the underlying biology, we correlated SQUALL -derived patient -level risk scores with bulk RNA -seq profiles 

in TCGA -CESC. High -risk scores were positively associated with proliferation and mitotic programs, including MKI67 

and TOP2A (Figure 5J), consistent with heightened cell -cycle activity in HPV -driven tumorigenesis. In contrast, genes 

negatively correlated with risk were enriched for epidermal differentiation and immune -related pathways, including 

TNF -α signaling via NF -κB and IL2 -STAT5 signaling ( Figure 5J), suggesting that loss of differentiation and dampened 

immune surveillance accompany poor outcomes. Consistent with RPPA -based prognostic stratification originally 

reported by TCGA 86 , SQUALL recapitulated the favorable prognostic association of steroid hormone response using 

histology images alone, without requiring additional molecular assays . A board -certified pathologist further confirmed 

these associations morphologically: high -risk regions exhibited significantly more mitotic figures (two -sided Mann -

Whitney U test , p-value < 0.05; Figure 5K; Figure S8 C-S8 F), whereas low -risk attention localized to keratin pearls 

and keratinization features recognizable in routine histology (Figure 5L).

Finally, we assessed whether SQUALL could capture treatment -relevant phenotypes by predicting resistance to

platinum -based chemotherapy, the standard of care for ovarian cancer 87 , across two independent ovarian cancer cohorts 

that were not used during SQUALL and other competing model s during pretraining (Table S45 and S49 ). Although 

overall accuracy was comparable to competing models, SQUALL achieved consistently higher F1 scores across cohorts 

(Figure 5M; Table S5 0), indicating improved sensitivity for treatment resistance prediction under class imbalance , a

common challenge in clinical datasets 88 .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Figure S8 | SQUALL enhances prognostic prediction from whole -slide images. Related to Figure 5H -5M. 

A. Representative ovarian cancer cases from the high - and low -risk groups in the in -house cohort, showing original H&E -stained 

whole -slide images ( Left ) and SQUALL -derived attention heatmaps for survival prediction ( Right ). Scale bar, 5 mm. Related to 

Figure 5I. 

B. Kaplan -Meier survival curve of early -stage TCGA -CESC patients comparing SQUALL and other pathology foundation models .

Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals are shown; Statistical significance was assessed using log -rank test. Related to Figure 

5K. 

C. Representative attention heatmaps for survival predictions generated by Virchow, PLIP, and UNI. Related to Figure 5J. 

D. Additional examples of histology images ( Left ) and SQUALL -derived attention heatmaps highlighting regions selected for 

survival prediction ( Right ). Scale bar, 5mm. 

E. Example of regions used for mitotic quantification. Arrows indicate mitotic cells. Related to Figure 5K. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

F. Box plot showing quantification of mitotic figures between SQUALL -predicted high - and low -risk groups. Box plot: center 

line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. Statistical significance was assessed using 

two -sided Mann -Whitney U test. Related to Figure 5K. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 39 

# Discussion 

A central challenge in cancer biology is that routine histopathology captures the architectural context through which 

tumors are diagnosed, yet provides only indirect access to the molecular programs that govern tumor progression, 

immune organization, and therapeutic outcome. Our results suggest that these programs are not absent from histology ,

rather, they are embedded in tissue morphology but remain inaccessible without explicit alignment to spatial molecular 

states. By learning this alignment at scale, SQUALL enables these latent programs to become accessible from 

histopathology, bridging morphological assessment and molecular understanding of tumors. To achieve this, we 

assembled histMol , a corpus comprising 1.76 billion paired histology -spatial transcriptomics spots/bins spanning tissues, 

platforms, and spatial resolutions and developed SQUALL as a multimodal foundation model for integrating tissue 

morphology with spatial molecular programs (documentation is available at 

https://squall.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#/ ). Compared with prior approaches based on bulk molecular profiling or limited 

spatial datasets 43 , our framework establishes a systematic strategy for linking histology with spatial transcriptomic 

programs at whole -transcriptome scale, complementing existing protein -level or image -based pretraining 

approaches 23,89 .

Following stage -wise pretraining on histMol , SQUALL enables latent spatial molecular programs to become accessible 

from routine histology, thereby supporting scalable molecular phenotyping from standard clinical images. By enabling 

virtual biomarker profiling from H&E -stained pathology, SQUALL provides a scalable complement to conventional 

spatial assays that are limited by cost and throughput. Across tumor types, SQUALL -derived virtual biomarkers capture 

prognostically relevant programs, and in cervical cancer they refine prognostic interpretation by resolving the spatial 

localization of protective immune activity, distinguishing intratumoral CD8⁺ T cell programs from im mune 

accumulation confined to the tumor -stroma interface. Together, these findings position SQUALL as a practical 

framework for translating spatial molecular insight into pathology imaging .

SQUALL also reveals spatially organized tumor -immune interactions that are not readily captured by h istology or 

transcriptomics alone. As an illustration , SQUALL identifies tumor -lineage -specific immune infiltration associated with 

tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) and uncovered a previously underappreciated link between tumor -associated vascular 

remodeling, hemorrhage, and impaired TLS maturation. These observations indicate that lymphoc yte aggregation alone 

is insufficient for effective anti -tumor immunity and highlight TLS maturation state and spatial tumor heterogeneity as 

key determinants of TLS function. SQUALL also delineates a necrotic niche enriched for immunosuppressive neutrophil 

activation, providing a mechanistic basis for the adverse prognostic impact of tumor necrosi s90 . Together, these re sults 

illustrate how multimodal spatial representations can uncover context -dependent tumor -immune interactions that are 

difficult to resolve using single -modality approaches. 

By enabling integrative modeling of histology and spatial transcriptomics data , SQUALL further supports molecular 

interrogation of tumor progression beyond descriptive spatial mapping . Whereas most spatial omics algorithms 

integrated with histology have focused on technical challenges within individual datasets, such as deconvolution 91 ,

resolution enhancement 41 , and imputation 92 , SQUALL supports biologically informed modeling of disease from large -

scale multimodal data. In breast cancer, SQUALL reconstructed a continuous spatial molecular trajectory associated 

with tumor invasion, spanning ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), invasive carcinomas, and more aggressive metaplastic -

like states, and linked this transition to progressive attenuation of TGF -β signaling. The spatial coupling between TGF -

β dynamics and invasive transition in human tumors complements prior mechanistic studies in mouse models 13 by 

extending these findings to direct observation in human tumors. In ovarian cancer, SQUALL identifies a relapse -

associated niche characterized by coordinated NF -κB activation across tumor and immune compartments, suggesting a 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 40

spatially organized program of immune exclusion. These findings highlight the potential of multimodal representations 

to connect spatial organization with underlying regulatory programs and to provide insight into disease progression and 

therapeutic resist ance. 

We further benchmarked SQUALL against pathology foundation models trained on histology images or histology -text 

pairs 23,84 . Despite being trained on substantially smaller datasets, SQUALL demonstrates superior performance in 

platinum -based chemotherapy resistance prediction and survival prediction across independent cohorts while providing 

interpretable attention maps that localize biologically meaningful regions . In cervical cancer, these maps linked mitotic 

activity to high risk and keratinization to favorable outcome. These results support the hypothesis that incorporating 

spatial transcriptomic information during pretraining produces histology representations that are more closely aligned 

with underlying molecular programs than those learned from clinical data alone. This biologically informed 

representation improves both predictive performance and interpretability, offering a practical path for transferring 

mo lecular insight into pathology imaging 93,94 .

Biological systems are inherently spatial, and spatial transcriptomics has transformed our ability to study cellular 

organization, microenvironmental signaling, and tissue architecture. As a multimodal foundation model, SQUALL 

enables systematic interrogation of spatial heterogeneity and pathway programs across disease states. While current 

spatial transcriptomics datasets remain constrained by sequencing and imaging area, the rapid evolution of high -

throughput dense -array plat forms 26,42 , combined with routine histology co -registration 95 , is likely to accelerate the scale 

and diversity of multimodal corpora for pretraining. Future directions will likely include integrating 3D spatial 

context 96,97 , multiplexed imaging 98 , and proteomics, as well as fine -tuning SQUALL with multiplex protein imaging 89,99 

and textual reports 100 , propelling the field toward increasingly integrative multimodal AI systems for precision 

medicine 101,102 . Together, these developments point toward a unified representation of tissue biology that integrates 

morphology, molecular state, and spatial organization. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 41

# Resources availability 

All processed histMol -low data used for stage 1 pretraining, together with a subset of processed histMol -high data, are 

available at  https://zenodo.org/records/17318279 . Due to privacy regulations, the full histMol -high dataset is restricted; 

the corresponding raw (unprocessed) data of histMol -high sourced from SPATCH can be access via  https://spatch.pku -

genomics.org/#/homepage .

SQUALL has been released as a Python package via GitHub. Source code, Jupyter notebooks for reproducing figures 

are accessible at  https://github.com/OswaldZhang/ SQUALL -release , and tutorials for SQUALL usage are accessible at 

https://squall.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#/ . The pretrained model weights can be access through 

https://huggingface.co/zongxu/S QUALL  .

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon 

reasonable request. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 92574301 , 92374116, T2321001), 

Innovative Drug Research and Development -National Science and Technology Major Project (2025ZD1800400), 

Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China 

(JYB2025XDXM502), Beijing A dvanced Center of Cellular Homeostasis and Aging -Related Diseases, and Peking -

Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences. We thank China Bester Group Telecom Co., Ltd. for providing part of the 

computational resources for SQUALL ’s pretraining. We also thank Dr. Stephen Williams and Dr. Michael Schnall -

Levin from 10x Genomics, Inc., for assistance with formatting VisiumHD data, and Mr. Zhuo Xu for help with figure 

preparation. Part of the analysis was conducted on the High -Perform ance Computing Platform of the Center for Life 

Sciences at Peking University. 

# Author contributions 

Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang), Z.Z. (Zexian Zeng), Y.M. and Z.L. conceived the study and designed experiments and analyses. 

Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang) derived, developed, and implemented SQUALL with assistance from B.Q., Z.Q., H.X., Y.W., 

J.D., and P.Z.; Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang), B.Q., Z.Q., H.X., Y.W., and J.D. performed computational analyses and 

visualization. Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang), B.Q., Y.H. (Yahui Zhao), Y.W., J.D., A.C., N.W., L.N., T.X., S.L. a ssembled the 

histMol corpus and curated sample metadata. Z.Z. (Zhe Zhang), Y.M. provided in -house ovarian cancer specimens, with 

Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang) and W.Z. performed histological imaging experiments with technical support from D.P.; Z.Z. 

(Zongxu Zhang), Y.Z. (Yahui Zhao), Z. L. designed and supervised the pathological annotation process with the help of 

L.X., X.X., Z.Y., J.X., C.W.; H.Z., Y.Z. (Yanping Zhao), P.R., and J.M., provided marker genes for in situ gene 

expression predictions. Z.Z (Zexian Zeng), Y.M., and Z.L. supervised the work. Z.Z. (Zongxu Zhang), Z.Z. (Zexian 

Zeng), Y.M., and Z.L. wrote and revised the manuscript with the help of other authors. 

# Conflicts of interest 

D.P. received sponsored research funding from Bayer AG and Boehringer Ingelheim. These grants were not related to 

the research reported in this study. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 42

# Methods 

Collection and assemble histMol data corpus 

We first assembled a large -scale pretraining data corpus, histMol , consisting of 6,194,156 paired low -resolution 

histology image -spatial transcriptomics spots and 1,640,264,658 high -resolution paired bins ( Figure 1B ), sourced from 

both public domain and in -house collections ( Table S1 -S7 ). The low -resolution dataset includes a variety of tissues, 

platforms, embedding protocols, and species, with an average resolution of 5.11 μm per pixel (equivalent to ~2× 

magnification). Sequencing resolution of these sections’ ranges from 25 μm to 200 μ m, arrange in various patterns, and 

was transformed into an image grid -like structure used for stage 1 training of SQUALL .

The high -resolution data, primarily collected from human gynecological 103 and gastrointestinal 26,42 patients’ FFPE tumor 

blocks, were acquired using VisiumHD platform ( Figure S1C ). Histological images were mapped to 0.5 μm per pixel 

(20× magnification, as obtained rapidly in clinical practice while preserve fine -grained pathological details) and aligned 

with 2 μm sequencing bins (a process referred to as texture mapping, described further below). The sequencing data 

were obtained natively in an image grid format and used in stage 2 training of SQUALL .

Besides, 4 pathologists with more than 5 years of experiences were recruited to annotate all collected histological images 

to provides region and tile level labels and check all collected samples metadata. The total size of the histMol corpus 

training data amounts to approximately 10 terabytes. Notably, the paired data are inherently spatially aligned, 

eliminating the need for off -the -shelf alignment procedures such as those used to manually match natural language 

descriptions with obje ct bounding boxes or additional efforts to align captions with images. In the following sections, 

we provide detailed descriptions of the data curation and resolution specific preprocessing process. 

Curation of histMol data corpus 

Publicly available data from Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, and Homo sapiens -Mus musculus xenograft models includes 

spatial transcriptomics raw spot -by -gene counts (in file formats such as *.h5, *.h5ad, *.rdf, *.mtx, *.gem, *.txt) and 

paired histology images (in formats like *.png, *.jpg, *.jpeg, *.tif). We developed an automatically pipeline to 

systematically collect these data from repositories includes NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus, ArrayExpress, Zenodo, 

SOAR, CELLxGENE, National Genomics Data Center, Figsha re, Single Cell Portal, Dryard, SpatialResearch, Human 

Cell Atlas, KU Leuven RDR, STOmics, and 10X Genomics (https://www.10xgenomics.com/cn/datasets) through 

(Table S1 ). Duplicates were manually identified and removed, and histological images that are either not H&E -stained 

or have relatively small tissue areas were filtered out ( Figure 1A ). Datasheets from HEST -1k 33 and STimage -1K4M 34 

were merged with the histMol corpus to further enhance data coverage and correct data collection batch effects across 

different laboratories 

For Visium data with missing spatial coordinates for spots, we aligned the barcodes with corresponding barcode 

whitelist and performed alignment of images and sequencing spots using LoupeBrowser. For other data which histology 

images and sequencing arrays were not aligned, we performed anchor -based alignment using SimpleITK. We applied 

Otsu’s method 104 to segment the tissue and obtained a foreground mask to filter tissue regions for the sequencing spots. 

Finally, all data were uniformly converted to AnnData format and saved as *.h5ad file using Scanpy, Seurat, Scipy, 

Numpy, Pandas, and Skimage. These da ta constitute the low -resolution portion of the histMol corpus. 

High -resolution paired histology and sequencing data consist of gynecological and gastrointestinal tumor patients were 

mainly collected from STAGE (https://stage.pku -genomics.org/#/homepage), SPATCH, and 10X datasets with 2 

additionally inhouse hepatocellu lar carcinoma (HCC) and stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) cohorts ( Table S7 ). Raw 

bin by gene count matrix was sorted in *.h5 HDF5 files with coordinated sorted in parquet files and paired histological 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 43

images were acquired on 40× magnification (~0.21 -0.25 μm per pixel). Other files acquired were *.h5 files sorted the 

3×3 perspective transformation matrix from bin coordinate to image pixels for each section. 

Data preprocessing 

For spatial transcriptomics data gene selections, shared genes with non -zero expression from Homo sapiens and Mus 

musculus sections were first merge for each species individually. We unified filtered and retained genes that has a 1 -to -

1 orthologues correspondence among species via sequence alignment from Ensembl 112 API, composed a set of 15,757 

genes altogether ( Figure S1A and S1B ). Gene expressions were filtered and padding with rearrangement to ensure 

consistence across different sections. Unlike single cell RNA sequencing data, where each column in the cell by gene 

matrix represent each individual cell, in low -resolution part of histMol corpus, a sequencing spot reflect a composition 

of cells locally, while for high -resolution part a sequencing bin only be a small fraction of cells, both are a single thin 

section sampled from the entire cells present on the tissue context. To efficient e ncode expression profiles, we first 

calculated library size and non -zero expression gene counts of each spot by Scanpy sc.pp.calculate_qc_metrics function 

and non -zero median expression value of each gene via t -digest 105 based on 6,194,156 identical spots of major low -

resolution technology platform (Visium, ST) in histMol cuprous as well as all 1,640,264,658 2 μm bins in high -

resolution platform. We observed that the median gene expression levels of spatial transcriptomics distribution are more 

concentrate and exhibit lower variation compared to those of scRNA -seq data, as calculated in Genecorpus -30M 

(quantified by interquartile range; Figure S1C ). Our subsequent analysis revealed a strong correlation between the 

library size of spots and the non -zero expression gene counts across sections from the major platforms ( Figure S1D ), 

as it is reported library size tends to correlate with tissue structure 106 . Based on these observations, we opted to binary 

the gene expressions for each spot, providing a computationally efficient and memory -saving representation of gene 

expression while retaining the biological processes in each spot. This approach is particul arly useful in the context of 

pseudo -labeling low -resolution data to construct a grid -like structure to provide region level supervision without posing 

specific prior assumption to the expression value. Resolution of histological images were estimated thro ugh fiducial 

detection frame or spot coordinate. 

For histological images scanned under suboptimal imaging conditions, we applied an algorithm based on perfect white 

reflection assumption 107 to adjust its color ( Figure S2A ). Briefly, after identifying the tissue foreground in the sections 

and cropping the fiducial detection frame of tissue, we treated the background as the “white point” relative to the tissue 

region. We calculated the adjustment ratio with respect to pure w hite (with RGB value [255, 255, 255]) and applied this 

linear transformation to the entire image, leveraging the fact that section scanners typically place a white calibration 

panel as the background. To enhance the robustness of the correction procedure a gainst uneven lighting conditions, we 

used the median RGB value of the background for the calculation. We noticed the background -corrected images 

enhanced the visualization of stain vectors for hematoxylin and eosin, facilitating more accurate annotation b y

pathologists according to their feedback ( Table S39 ). 

Convert low -resolution data into grid -like data format by pseudo labeling 

In low -resolution part of histMol corpus, the sequencing spots arrangement can be s quare lattice , hexagonal lattice, or 

centered rectangular lattice with various spot diameters and center -to -center distance. To convert it into a uniformed 

image grid like data structure ( Figure S2B ), we first sketched the bounding box coordinate of each spot in the 

corresponding image and then round it to integer value dividable by 4: the pixel number of a 2 μm bin correspond at 

20× imaging magnification. We then partitioned the original spot into 4 pixels length sub spots and assigned spot original 

expression profiles accordingly. To fill the gap between spots, we utilized a simple nearest neighbor interpretation 

method, for its computational efficiency and did not introduce library size artifacts c ompared to other comparable 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 44

methods in our benchmark ( Figure S2C -S2E ). This method is analogous to morphological dilation commonly used in 

computer vision. The whole process was referred as pseudo labeling in the main text. 

Align high -resolution data by texture mapping 

In high -resolution part of histMol corpus, the 2 μm length sequencing square bins are arranged in a square lattice pattern 

without any gap in between, Raw histology images were acquired at 40× magnification. A 3×3 perspective transform 

matrix  was sorted at feature slice HDF5 files for each sections individually to mapping sequencing bin coordinates to 

corresponding raster histological image. To align image pixels with sequencing bins, inspired by real time rendering 108 ,

we developed a texture mapping operator ( Figure S2F ). Briefly, for the continuous 2 μm sequencing bin index, we 

evenly spaced the interval between continuous inter index to get an image pixel grid at desired resolution (not exceed 

the original image resolution e.g. 4 for 0.5 μm per pixel), calculated corre sponding raster pixel corner coordinates and 

transformed it to image space via the perspective transform matrix. Then, the transformed raster bin quadrilateral was 

used to calculate its overlap with the original raster histological images pixels via ray -ca sting algorithm. The overlap 

polygons for each quadrilateral with the original image pixels were recorded in Cartesian coordinates, and their area 

were calculated using Gauss's area formula, used as weights to perform box downsampling for each newly mapped 

raster pixel. For quadrilateral which coordinate exceed the original images, we imputed corresponding image pixels by 

using the median RGB value of background in the original image. The entire algorithm was implemented in Python, 

with performance accelera ted using Numba, a just -in -time (JIT) compiler package, and parallelized with Parallel Range 

for efficient multi -threaded for loops execution. In our testing, it takes approximately 10 minutes on a 32 CPU cores 

server to do texture mapping for an original 40× image to 20× with 180,633,600 pixels ( Figure S2L ). New bins to image 

pixels correspondence table were sorted by parquet files for efficient I/O. 

Pathological taxonomy harmonization 

To generate section -level labels for evaluation, we manually verified all tissue annotations in the histMol corpus curated 

from the original publications and metadata. Three experienced pathologists were recruited to harmonize the tissue 

hierarchy by consensus. For cases with metastasis, sections were labeled according to the anatomical origin of the 

sequencing tissue. The hippocampus, olfactory bulb, and cortical regions were merged into the category brain; embryos 

from different developmental stages were merged into embryo; and fetal tissues were assigned to their respective 

categories. Salivary glands, period ontal tissue, nasopharyngeal tissue, and oral tissue were grouped into the head and 

neck category. Similarly, colon, small intestine, rectosigmoid, duodenum, and ileum were merged into intestine. For 

sequencing sections containing multiple tissues, we manu ally segmented them into individual regions to ensure that 

each section received a single label ( Table S5 ). 

For section -level cancer annotations, only human cancer sections underwent metadata curation. Each section was 

assigned a single label aligned with the National Cancer Institute’s “Cancers by Body Location/System” 

(https://www.cancer.gov/types/by -body -loca tion) with minor modification to merge redundancy term ( Table S6 ). 

For high -resolution compartments of the histMol dataset, tissue labels and cancer pathological subtypes were derived 

from the original pathology reports ( Table S7 and S41 ). 

Pathological annotations 

To evaluate SQUALL ’s ability to integrate pathological features, all breast cancer tissue sections from the histMol -low 

component were selected for pathological review ( Table S38 ). Three board -certified pathologists were recruited to 

annotate all collected histological images. Annotation granularity and hierarchy were determined by their consensus 

(Figure S6C ), based on the finest -resolution images available. In addition, we sampled a spectrum of tissue sections 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 45

containing multiple tissue types and annotated them to serve as ground truth for downstream evaluation of tissue 

annotation tasks ( Table S33 ). Sections with detailed annotations from the original study were also incorporated, and 

anatomical gene markers expression map were visualized to ensure annotation accuracy. We additional summarize our 

experienced during annotation to facilitate further research ( Table S39 ). 

To provide tile -level labels for stage 2 training evaluation, ablation studies on stage -wise training strategies, and to 

discover spatial regions associated with clinical outcomes, we further annotated all collected gynecological tumor 

sections from the histMol -high compartment ( Figure S7A ; Table S20 ). Annotations were performed in QuPath (various 

versions) on personal computers. The annotated objects from the corresponding *.qpdata files were extracted and 

converted into GeoJSON polygon formats for each individual section. A custom script was then us ed to assign each tile 

its corresponding polygon label, with tiles containing mixed polygons discarded. 

Data tiling 

Histological images were segmented via Otsu’s thresholding to obtain a binary tissue mask separate foreground and 

background areas. For high -resolution data, we downsampled it by 20× and perform segmentation with additional 

morphological erosion and dilati on and then upsampling the mask back to original image shape to ensure robustness 

against small pitches in tissue as well as reduce computational burden. 

After segmentation, paired histology image and gene expression matrix were exhaustively cropped together to get 

224×224×3 shape non -overlap tiles for histological images and extract corresponding spatial transcriptomics region. 

Gene expression spot or bin by gene matrix were then converted into 56×56×15,757 shape tensor. Tiles containing more 

than 50% background regions were discarded. Histology image tiles were stored as *.tif files to preserve numerical 

precision, while gene expression tiles were saved as sparse tensors in *.pt format to ensure efficient interaction with 

PyTorch. The coordinates of corresponding tiles relative to the whole section were recorded directly in the respective 

file names. 

We did not perform ImageNet mean RGB value normalization or random resize crop but normalize the RGB value to 

[0,1] to make sure numerical value consistent of different data modality. We also developed a custom collate function 

optimized for efficient batc h processing of tensor data and iteration function to streaming load data during model training. 

Development of SQUALL 

SQUALL is a multimodal self -supervised learning framework developed based on the transformer architecture and 

pretrained on histMol corpus in a two -stage manner with different resolution to integrate the spatial transcriptomics with 

histological images ( Figure 1C ). Here, we provide a detailed description of the design choices underlying SQUALL ,

with the aim of informing and inspiring future model developments. The main purposes of developing SQUALL as a 

foundation model are to develop a model that: 1) trained from massive and diverse dataset sourced from both in -house 

and public domains; 2) served as a freeze feature extractor 3) and can adapt to a wide range of downstream tasks. After 

the first sta ge training, even with relatively low -resolution images and sequencing spots, can not only provide a feature 

extractor but serve as a good model parameters tuning starting point compared with random initiation. After the second 

stage training with clinical ly relevant high -resolution images and spatial transcriptomics data, the entire model can 

function either as a frozen feature extraction for clinical histology images and gene expression across sequencing spots 

or serve as a fine -tuning starting point to p rovide better parameters initiation for further model development. We have 

made the model and pretrained parameters fully open sourced to facility transparency of the study as well as to fuel the 

development of the fields. We detailed the pretraining objec tive, encoder architecture, and pretraining recipe in 

subsequence sections. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 46

Introduction to SQUALL 

The objective of SQUALL is to learn fine -grained, semantically rich representations of both H&E -stained 

histopathology images and spatially resolved transcriptomic data, effectively capturing spatial dependencies and cross -

modal relationships. Recent advances in Masked Image Mod eling (MIM) and Masked Language Modeling (MLM) have 

demonstrated their efficacy in learning meaningful representations 22,109,110 . Motivated by these developments, we 

introduce SQUALL , a cross -modal masked modeling framework designed to jointly encode histological and spatial 

transcriptomic modalities ( Figure S3A ). By integrating these heterogeneous data types, SQUALL generates biologically 

and clinically informative embeddings, facilitating unsupervised biological discovery and yielding insights of 

translational relevance. 

Herein, we provide a comprehensive description of model design and the optimization target derivation. 

Tissue section representation 

For a given tissue section, either originating from an OCT -embedded fresh frozen (FF) block or a formalin -fixed 

paraffin -embedded (FFPE) archival sample, most spatial transcriptomic protocols perform molecular profiling and H&E 

staining sequentially on the same physical section. 

Hematoxylin, a basic dye, stains nuclear chromatin and cytoplasmic nucleic acids in shades of violet blue. In contrast, 

eosin, an acidic dye, labels extracellular matrix components and cytoplasmic proteins in pink to red hues. This 

differential staining pr oduces pixel -level variations in color, contrast, and intensity, reflecting the underlying 

intracellular and intercellular structures. These histological patterns allow trained pathologists to discern nuclear and 

cytoplasmic compartments, infer cellular di stributions, and render diagnostic interpretations based on tissue architecture. 

Histological imaging is typically acquired at either 20× magnification (~0.5 μm per pixel) or 40× magnification (~0.25 

μm per pixel). 

In spatial transcriptomics, molecular profile resolution depends on the specific sequencing method used 42 . In spatial 

barcoding -based techniques, the fundamental spatial unit, defined by the diameter of the capture spots or barcoded 

features, ranges from ~500 nm to 2 -55 μm, with or without interspot gaps, depending on the chemical and platform -

specific design . In contrast, in situ sequencing (ISS) approaches, which target a predefined panel of transcripts, can 

achieve resolutions approaching ~20 nm, limited primarily by the theoretical minimum size of a single fluorophore 

signal. In practice, across most tissue samples in the histMol corpus, the spatial resolution of the molecular data is 

substantially lower than that of the corresponding histological images. To address this disparity in resolution and 

establish a common reference framework, we adopt an image grid representation of th e tissue section, facilitating spatial 

alignment and multimodal integration. 

For a given tissue section, similar to common practice in the field of computer vision and computational pathology 23,84,85 ,

we first partition both the H&E -stained histological image and the corresponding molecular sequencing data into non -

overlapping tiles. This facilitates modeling of local spatial dependencies while reducing computational overhead. 

Let a single image tile be represented as  ℐ ∈ ℝ𝑟 ℎ×𝑟𝑤 ×𝐶  and the corresponding molecular expression tile as  𝒳 ∈

ℝℎ×𝑤 ×𝑔 , where:  𝐶  denotes the number of image channels ( 𝐶 = 3 for standard RGB H&E staining),  𝑔  is the number 

of genes profiled in the sequencing library,  ℎ and  𝑤  denote the height and width of the sequencing grid within a tile, 

𝑟  is a resolution scaling factor, accounting for the difference in spatial resolution between the image and molecular data. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 47

The scaling factor  𝑟  aligns the higher -resolution histological image with the lower -resolution sequencing grid. For 

instance, in the case of 10X VisiumHD data, where the minimum spatial resolution of sequencing is 2 μm, and the 

histological image is captured at 20× magnificat ion (0.5 μm per pixel), the scaling factor is  𝑟 = 4.

The corresponding expression grid for a tile is denoted as  𝒯 ∈ ℝℎ×𝑤  and the total number of pixels in the image and 

molecular units per tile are: 

𝑛 : = 𝑟 2 × ℎ × 𝑤 , 𝑚 : = ℎ × 𝑤 .

This formulation allows precise spatial correspondence between modalities and serves as the foundation for cross -modal 

representation learning in SQUALL .

Data masking 

The core idea of masking involves randomly substituting a subset of image pixels with the corresponding molecular 

sequencing units, thereby generating a hybrid input that is processed by a unified encoder equipped with modality -

specific expert branches ( Figure 1C ). Conceptually, masking serves to capture the relationships among local regions: 

by reconstructing the masked content from limited observed data, the model performs a denoising -like task, implicitly 

learning invariances and robustness against perturbation s

This random replacement one modality data with another serves as a form of modality -aware masking, encouraging the 

model to jointly reason over both data types. Importantly, owing to the intrinsic spatial alignment between the histology 

image and molecular grid, explicit cross -modal registration is not required. Instead, through mutual information 

maximization, embeddings from one modality can be directly leveraged to reconstruct or inform the other (Figure S3B ). 

Given that each sequencing unit corresponds to an  𝑟 × 𝑟  region in the H&E image, reconstructing high -resolution 

histological pixels from coarse molecular features imposes a resolution bottleneck. Conversely, for gene expression 

reconstruction, the H&E region corresponding to each molecular unit defines the spa tial context window for feature 

extraction. This mutual constraint ensures that each modality informs the representation of the other within the bounds 

of their respective resolutions. 

By training the encoder on a large corpus of paired image -transcriptome data, the model learns to generate modality -

aware and spatially coherent representations, enabling robust cross -modal reconstruction and downstream biological 

inference. 

For each tissue section represented as a grid  𝒯 ∈ ℝℎ×𝑤 , we introduce a masking matrix  ℳ = [𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗 ]ℎ×𝑤 ∈ ℝℎ×𝑤 to 

indicate the visibility status of each spatial location for the two modalities. Specifically, the masking values are defined 

as: 

𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗 = {1, if (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) corresponds to a visible image region within the tile ,

0, if (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) corresponds to a visible sequencing unit within the tile .

Due to the resolution discrepancy between histological images and gene expression grids, we upsampled the mask to 

obtain a pixel -level mask  ℳ′ = [𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗  

> ′

]𝑟 ℎ×𝑟𝑤 ∈ ℝ𝑟 ℎ×𝑟𝑤  for the image domain using the scale factor  𝑟  The upsampling 

is defined as: 

ℳ′ = ℳ↑𝑟 , with 𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗  

> ′

= 𝑚 ⌊𝑖 /𝑟 ⌋,⌊𝑗 /𝑟 ⌋.

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 48

This operation ensures that the  𝑟 × 𝑟  region in the image corresponding to each sequencing unit adopts the same 

masking status, thereby enabling complementary masking across modalities. Specifically: Image pixels are visible where 

𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗  

> ′

= 1 (i.e.,  𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗 = 1); sequencing units are visible where  𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗 = 0 (i.e.,  𝑚 𝑖 ,𝑗  

> ′

= 0). 

The hybridized input formed through this masking scheme is used as input to the model. During training, only the visible 

compartments from each modality are encoded 36 . The learned embeddings are then combined with modality -specific 

mask tokens to reconstruct the masked content of the opposite modality. 

We denote the visible components of the sequencing and image modalities as: 

𝒳 𝑣 = {𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

∈ ℝ1×𝑔 |𝑚 𝑖𝑗 = 0}𝑘 =1 

> 𝛼 1

, ℐ𝑣 = {𝑝 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

∈ ℝ1×𝐶 |𝑚 𝑖𝑗  

> ′

= 1}𝑘 =1 

> 𝛽 1

,

where: 

𝛼 1 = ∑ ∑(1 − 𝑚 𝑖𝑗 )

> 𝑤
> 𝑗 =1
> ℎ
> 𝑖 =1

, (total number of visible sequencing units) ,

𝛽 1 = ∑ ∑ 𝑚 𝑖𝑗 

> ′
> 𝑟𝑤
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑟 ℎ
> 𝑖 =1

, (total number of visible image pixels) .

Correspondingly, the masked (invisible) components are denoted as: 

𝒳 𝑚 = {𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

∈ ℝ1×𝑔 |𝑚 𝑖𝑗 = 1}𝑘 =1 

> 𝛽 2

, ℐ𝑚 = {𝑝 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

∈ ℝ1×𝐶 |𝑚 𝑖𝑗  

> ′

= 0}𝑘 =1 

> 𝛼 2

,

with 

𝛼 2 = ℎ ⋅ 𝑤 − 𝛼 1, (total number of masked image tiles) ,

𝛽 2 = 𝑟 2 ⋅ ℎ ⋅ 𝑤 − 𝛽 1, (total number of masked sequencing pixels) .

In implementation, the masking operator is realized via the Hadamard product (element -wise multiplication) between 

the input tensors and their corresponding binary masks. Specifically: 

ℐ𝑣 = ℐ ⊙ ℳ′, ℐ𝑚 = ℐ ⊙ ¬ℳ′,

𝒳 𝑣 = 𝒳 ⊙ ¬ℳ, 𝒳 𝑚 = 𝒳 ⊙ ℳ,

here,  ⊙ denotes the Hadamard (elementwise) product, and  ¬ indicates element -wise logical negation of the binary 

mask. 

This complementary masking design enables cross -modal reconstruction , wherein visible features from one modality 

are used to reconstruct the masked content of the other. Such a strategy promotes the learning of shared semantic 

representations that are both modality -aware and spatially coherent, facilitating robust multimodal integration. 

SQUALL encoder 

Following the design of Masked Autoencoders (MAE) 36 , SQUALL only pass through the visible portions of each 

modality to reduce computational cost while preserving representational capacity during pertaining. Specifically, the 

visible features from each modality are first projected into a shared embedding space via modality -specific projection 

layers. For the visible spatial transcriptomic units  𝒳 𝑣 , we apply a learnable linear projection to obtain the input token 

sequence: 

𝒱 0 = {𝑣 𝑘  

> 0

= 𝑥 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑤 𝒳 ∈ ℝ1×𝑝 }𝑘 =1 

> 𝛼 1

,

where  𝑝  denotes the embedding dimension and  𝑤 𝒳 ∈ ℝ𝑔 ×𝑝  is the trainable projection matrix. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 49

For the visible histological image patches  ℐ𝑣  , SQUALL employ a lightweight convolutional layer  𝑓 conv : ℝ𝑟 ×𝑟 ×𝐶 →

ℝ1×1×𝑝 to perform projection. This operation maps each  𝑟 × 𝑟  pixel region (patch) into a single embedding vector, 

yielding the pathological image token sequence: 

𝒰 0 = {𝑢 𝑘  

> 0

= 𝑓 conv (𝑝 𝑘 ) ⋅ 𝑊 𝐼 ∈ ℝ1×𝑝 }𝑘 =1 

> 𝛽 1

.

To encode positional information, we compute absolute positional embeddings by first multiplying the spatial 

coordinates of each token  𝑧 𝑖𝑗  by the corresponding resolution of the tissue section. These coordinates are then passed 

through a shallow neural network  𝑓 PE : ℝ1×2 → ℝ1×𝑝 , which outputs the absolute positional embedding within a tile. 

The input token sequence for the mixed -modality representation is constructed as: 

𝒛 0 = [𝒖 0, 𝒗 0] = [𝑢 1 

> 0

+ 𝑓 PE (𝑢 1

> 0

), … , 𝑢 𝛼 1 

> 0

+ 𝑓 PE (𝑢 𝛼 1 

> 0

), 𝑣 1 

> 0

+ 𝑓 PE (𝑣 1

> 0

), … , 𝑣 𝛼 2 

> 0

+ 𝑓 PE (𝑣 𝛼 2 

> 0

)],

where  𝑢 𝑖  

> 0

and  𝑣 𝑗  

> 0

denote the projected tokens from histology and gene expression modalities, respectively, as defined 

earlier. 

Cells in tissue commonly interact with their local microenvironment s. To encoding spatial information in SQUALL ,

despite added a shared fixed or learned absolute position embedding for each tile cropped from sections, we employed 

a learnable relative position bias to bring regulation of spatial tissue context on attention weight per patch tokens. This 

approach previ ously employed on cell segmentation by leveraging spatial transcriptomics data 111 . Specifically, we 

compute pairwise relative positional offsets and embed them using another shallow neural network  𝑏 PB : ℝ1×2 → ℝ1×𝑝 :

𝑟 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 , 𝑧 𝑠𝑡 ) = [𝑖 − 𝑠 , 𝑗 − 𝑡 ], 𝑏 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 , 𝑧 𝑠𝑡 ) = 𝑏 PB (𝑟 (𝑧 𝑖𝑗 , 𝑧 𝑠𝑡 )).

These relative position embeddings can be incorporated into attention computation to enhance the model’s ability to 

capture spatial context across both modalities (Figure S3D ). 

The attention mechanism in the SQUALL encoder incorporates both intra -modality and inter -modality interactions 

among tokens from the histology and gene expression domains. Let  𝒛 𝑙 ∈ ℝ(ℎ×𝑤 )×𝑝  denote the input token sequence at 

the  𝑙 -th layer. The query, key, and value tensors are computed as follows: 

𝑲 𝑧  

> 𝑙

= 𝒛 𝑙 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑙

= [𝒖 𝑙 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑙

, 𝒗 𝑙 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑙

] = [𝑲 𝑢  

> 𝑙

, 𝑲 𝑣  

> 𝑙

],

𝑸 𝑧  

> 𝑙

= 𝒛 𝑙 𝑊 𝑄  

> 𝑙

= [𝒖 𝑙 𝑊 𝑄  

> 𝑙

, 𝒗 𝑙 𝑊 𝑄  

> 𝑙

] = [𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

, 𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

],

𝑽 𝑧  

> 𝑙

= 𝒛 𝑙 𝑊 𝑉  

> 𝑙

= [𝒖 𝑙 𝑊 𝑉  

> 𝑙

, 𝒗 𝑙 𝑊 𝑉  

> 𝑙

] = [𝑽 𝑢  

> 𝑙

, 𝑽 𝑣  

> 𝑙

],

where  𝒖 𝑙  and  𝒗 𝑙  denote tokens from the histology and gene expression modalities, respectively, and  𝑊 𝑄  

> 𝑙

, 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑙

, 𝑊 𝑉  

> 𝑙

∈

ℝ𝑝 ×𝑑  are learnable projection matrices for the  𝑙 -th attention layer. 

The multi -head attention output  𝒜 (𝒛 𝑙 ) is computed via scaled dot -product attention with relative positional bias: 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

𝒜 (𝒛 𝑙 ) = 𝒮𝒜 ([𝒖 𝑙 , 𝒗 𝑙 ]𝑇 ) = softmax ([𝑸 𝑢 

> 𝑙

𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

][𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

𝑲 𝑣  

> 𝑙 𝑇

] + [𝑩 𝑢𝑢 𝑩 𝑢𝑣 

𝑩 𝑣𝑢 𝑩 𝑣𝑣 

])[𝑽 𝑢 

> 𝑙

𝑽 𝑣  

> 𝑙

]

= softmax ([𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑢 𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑣 

𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑢 𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑣 

])[𝑽 𝑢 

> 𝑙

𝑽 𝑣  

> 𝑙

]

= [𝒖 

> ~
> 𝑙 +1

𝒗 

> ~
> 𝑙 +1

] = [

exp (𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢  

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑢 )𝑽 𝑢 

> 𝑙
> ⏞
> Intra -modality

+ exp (𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣  

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑣 )𝑽 𝑣 

> 𝑙
> ⏞
> Inter -modality

exp (𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑢 ) + exp (𝑸 𝑢  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑢𝑣 )

exp (𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑢 )𝑽 𝑢 

> 𝑙
> ⏞
> Inter -modality

+ exp (𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑣 )𝑽 𝑣 

> 𝑙
> ⏞
> Intra -modality

exp (𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑢 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑢 ) + exp (𝑸 𝑣  

> 𝑙

𝑲 𝑣 

> 𝑙 𝑇

+ 𝑩 𝑣𝑣 )

]

= [𝒖 

> ~
> 𝑙 +1

, 𝒗 

> ~
> 𝑙 +1

]𝑇 .

Here,  𝑩 = 𝑏 × Res  denotes the resolution -scaled relative positional bias, where  𝑏  is the learned positional embedding 

and  Res  accounts for data's physical resolution. The softmax function is applied row -wise to the attention score matrix. 

For notational clarity, we omit the scale factor  1/√𝑑  in the intermediate expressions but include it in the actual 

implementation to ensure numerical stability. 

This design allows each token regardless of modality to be updated through a unified attention mechanism, incorporating 

both modality -specific context (intra -modality attention) and cross -modal signals (inter -modality attention), thereby 

enabling rich, spa tially aligned multimodal representation learning. 

Subsequently, the intermediate token sequence after the attention block is updated via a residual connection with layer 

normalization: 

𝒛 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

= 𝒜 (ℒ𝒩 (𝒛 𝑙 )) + 𝒛 𝑙 = [𝒖 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

, 𝒗 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

]𝑇 ,

where  ℒ𝒩  denotes the layer normalization operation. 

In the shallow attention blocks of the SQUALL encoder, modality -specific information is retained by routing tokens 

through two separate expert networks, enabling the extraction of modality -specialized features ( Figure S3C ). This is 

implemented using a Mixture -of -Modality Experts (Mo ME) 37 mechanism: 

ℳ𝑜 ℳℰ ([𝒖 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

, 𝒗 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

]𝑇 ) = [𝑓 𝑙 (𝒖 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

), 𝑓 𝑙 (𝒗 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

)]𝑇 

= [𝜎 (𝒖 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

𝑊 𝑙 1 

> 𝑢

+ 𝑏 𝑙 1 

> 𝑢

)𝑊 𝑙 2 

> 𝑢

+ 𝑏 𝑙 2 

> 𝑢

, 𝜎 (𝒗 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

𝑊 𝑙 1 

> 𝑣

+ 𝑏 𝑙 1 

> 𝑣

)𝑊 𝑙 2 

> 𝑣

+ 𝑏 𝑙 2 

> 𝑣

]𝑇 ,

where  𝑊 𝑙 1 , 𝑊 𝑙 2 and  𝑏 𝑙 1 , 𝑏 𝑙 2 are learnable weights and biases for each expert, and  𝜎 (⋅) denotes a non -linear 

activation function (e.g., GELU or ReLU). 

The final token representations at the  (𝑙 + 1)-th layer are then updated via another residual connection: 

𝒛 𝑙 +1 = [𝒖 𝑙 +1, 𝒗 𝑙 +1] = ℳ𝑜 ℳℰ (ℒ𝒩 (𝒛 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

)) + 𝒛 𝑙 +1 

> 𝐴

.

In contrast, in the deeper layers of the encoder, modality -specific distinctions are gradually relaxed. Tokens from both 

modalities are processed jointly through shared experts, promoting the learning of unified, modality -agnostic 

representations. 

The complete SQUALL encoder  ℱ thus produces the final latent representations as: 

𝒛 𝐿 = [𝒖 𝐿 , 𝒗 𝐿 ] = ℱ([ℐ𝑣 , 𝒳 𝑣 ]) = [ℱℳ𝑜 ℳℰ  

> ℐ

(ℐ𝑣 ), ℱℳ𝑜 ℳℰ  

> 𝒳

(𝒳 𝑣 )],

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 51

where  ℱℳ𝑜 ℳℰ  

> ℐ

and  ℱℳ𝑜 ℳℰ  

> 𝒳

denote the modality -specific encoding branches for histology images and spatial 

transcriptomics, respectively. 

This Mixture -of -Modality Experts (Mo ME) architecture allows the model to flexibly balance modality -specific 

learning in early layers and modality -fused representation in deeper layers. As a result, SQUALL produces 

embeddings that generalize well across a wide spectrum of downstream tasks, supporting both joint and modality -

specific applications ( Figure 1E ). 

Training objective 

The pretext training objective of SQUALL is masked data reconstruction 35,36 , wherein the shallow decoder is 

trained to recover missing image pixels and gene sequencing units from the latent representations produced by the 

encoder ( Figure S3A ). The modeling framework is based on latent variable modeling, under the assumption that 

the latent variable  𝒛 𝐿  follows a point mass distribution , which is deterministically inferred from the input data via 

the SQUALL encoder  ℱ, pretrained on the histMol corpus at scale. 

The joint likelihood of the observed data pair  (ℐ, 𝒳 ) is modeled as: 

𝑝 (ℐ, 𝒳 ; 𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 ) = ∫ 𝑝 (ℐ|𝒵 ; 𝜃 ℐ ) ⋅ 𝑝 (𝒳 |𝒵 ; 𝜃 𝒳 ) ⋅ 𝑝 (𝒵 |ℐ, 𝒳 ; 𝜙 )𝑑𝒵 ,

where  𝑝 (ℐ|𝒵 ; 𝜃 ℐ ) and  𝑝 (𝒳 |𝒵 ; 𝜃 𝒳 ) are modality -specific generative decoders (parameterized via shallow 

transformer blocks), and  Θ

> ~

= {𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 , 𝜙 } denotes all trainable parameters. 

SQUALL approximate the posterior over latent variables using a deterministic encoder: 

𝑝 (𝒵 |ℐ, 𝒳 ; 𝜙 ) ≈ 𝛿 (𝒵 − ℱ𝜙 (ℐ, 𝒳 )),

where  𝛿 (⋅) is a Dirac delta function centered at the encoder output. 

To train the model, we minimize the KL divergence between the true data distribution  𝑝 Θ and the model 

distribution  𝑝 Θ 

> ~

:

min 𝐷 KL (𝑝 Θ(ℐ, 𝒳 )‖𝑝 Θ 

> ~

(ℐ, 𝒳 )) = 𝔼 (ℐ,𝒳 )∼𝑝 Θ [log 𝑝 Θ(ℐ, 𝒳 ) − log 𝑝 Θ 

> ~

(ℐ, 𝒳 )],

where the first term is constant w.r.t. model parameters and can be omitted during optimization. This yields the 

log -likelihood maximization objective: 

max 

> 𝜙 ,𝜃 ℐ,𝜃 𝒳

ℒ(𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 ) = 𝔼 (ℐ,𝒳 )∼𝑝 𝒟 [log 𝑝 (ℐ, 𝒳 ; 𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 )]

≈ 1

|𝒟 | ∑ log 𝑝 (ℐ, 𝒳 ; 𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 )

> (ℐ,𝒳 )∈𝒟

,

which expands to: 

ℒ(𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 ) = − 1

|𝒟 | ∑ log [𝑝 (ℐ|𝒵 = ℱ𝜙 (ℐ, 𝒳 ); 𝜃 ℐ ) ⋅ 𝑝 (𝒳 |𝒵 = ℱ𝜙 (ℐ, 𝒳 ); 𝜃 𝒳 )]

> (ℐ,𝒳 )∈𝒟

= − 1

|𝒟 | ∑ log 

> (ℐ,𝒳 )∈𝒟

𝑝 (ℐ|𝒵 ) − log 𝑝 (𝒳 |𝒵 ) .

Focusing on the masked reconstruction task, we optimize the conditional likelihood of the masked tokens given 

the visible ones: 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 52

ℒ(𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 ) ≈ − 1

|𝒟 | ∑ log 𝑝 (ℐ𝑚 |𝒵 = ℱ𝜙 (ℐ𝑣 , 𝒳 𝑣 ); 𝜃 ℐ )

> (ℐ,𝒳 )∈𝒟

− log 𝑝 (𝒳 𝑚 |𝒵 = ℱ𝜙 (ℐ𝑣 , 𝒳 𝑣 ); 𝜃 𝒳 ) .

We assume Gaussian observation for both modalities: 

𝑝 (ℐ𝑚 |𝒵 ) = 𝒩 (ℐ

> ^
> 𝑚

, 𝜎 2𝑰 ), 𝑝 (𝒳 𝑚 |𝒵 ) = 𝒩 (𝒳 

> ^
> 𝑚

, 𝜎 2𝑰 ),

which implies that the log -likelihoods reduce to MSE terms: 

log 𝑝 (ℐ𝑚 |𝒵 ) ∝ −‖ℐ𝑚 − ℐ

> ^
> 𝑚

‖2, log 𝑝 (𝒳 𝑚 |𝒵 ) ∝ −‖𝒳 𝑚 − 𝒳 

> ^
> 𝑚

‖2.

Thus, the final loss function for SQUALL pretraining becomes: 

ℒ(𝜙 , 𝜃 ℐ , 𝜃 𝒳 ) ∝ 1

|𝒟 | ∑ ( 1

|𝛼 2| ∑ ‖𝑝 𝑘 − 𝑝 

> ^
> 𝑘

‖2

> 𝛼 2
> 𝑘 =1

+ 1

|𝛽 2| ∑ ‖𝑥 𝑘 − 𝑥 

> ^
> 𝑘

‖2

> 𝛽 2
> 𝑘 =1

)

> (ℐ,𝒳 )∈𝒟

,

where  𝛼 2 and  𝛽 2 denote the number of masked image pixels and masked sequencing units, respectively. The loss 

is normalized to maintain scale invariance. 

To improve stability and robustness to outliers, we replace the  ℓ2 loss with a smooth  ℓ1 loss 112 , defined as: 

SmoothL1 (𝑥 ) = { 0.5𝑥 2, if |𝑥 | < 𝛿 

𝛿 (|𝑥 | − 0.5𝛿 ), otherwise with 𝛿 = 1.

Stage -wise training recipe 

To account for the resolution differences across components of the histMol corpus, we adopted a stage -wise continual 

training recipe for SQUALL (Figure 1D ). In the first stage, the model was trained on the histMol -low corpus and 

evaluated on its corresponding downstream tasks to ensure robust feature learning under low -resolution conditions. In 

the second stage, the model was further trained on the histMol -high corpus, using the parameters learned from the 

histMol -low stage as initialization. 

At each stage, training convergence was empirically assessed by monitoring task -specific probe performance and the 

loss curve, demonstrating saturation before proceeding to the next stage. This progressive training scheme enabled 

SQUALL to effectively capture hierarchical molecular -histological representations across varying spatial resolutions. 

Model optimization and pretraining evaluation 

Ancillary probing tasks for SQUALL training evaluation 

To conduct ablation studies to evaluate the effectiveness of key components of SQUALL , as well as to assess the 

efficiency of its pretraining, we designed a series of ancillary probing tasks, including section -level classification 

(Figure S3E ) and tile -level classification ( Figure S3G ). 

For section -level classification, we prepend a [CLS] token to each tile sequence cropped from a given section and use 

its final latent representation after passing the entire sequence through the encoder. A shallow ABMIL (Attention -Based 

Multiple Instance Learning) 113 layer is then employed to aggregate the [CLS] token embeddings from all tiles into a 

contextual section embedding, which is subsequently used as the input to train a classification model. Specifically, for 

each tile’s [CLS] token embedding  𝑥 𝑖 ∈ 𝑅 𝐿 , the final section level representation  𝑧  produced by ABMIL is defined as: 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 53

𝑧 = ∑ 𝛼 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 𝑖  ,

where  𝛼 𝑖  is the learnable weighted that prioritizes tile level embedding and is calculated as: 

𝛼 𝑖 = exp (𝑤 ⊤ tanh (𝑊 𝑥 𝑖 +𝑏 ))  

> ∑exp (𝑤 ⊤tanh (𝑊 𝑥 𝑗 +𝑏 )𝑗

,

with  𝑊  and  𝑏  being the learnable parameters of a single -layer neural network. 

The aggregated section embedding is then used to train a simple logistics regression classifier. The prediction targets 

include both section -level tissue label and cancer type according to different aspect of evaluation purpose. The prediction 

targets incl ude both section -level tissue type and cancer type, depending on the evaluation objective. This probing task 

is conducted on the histMol -low component, where each tile is assigned a tissue or cancer type label if sourced from 

annotated human cancer sections. 

For tile -level classification, a linear classifier is applied on top of the frozen tile encoder to predict the pathological label 

of each tile using its corresponding [CLS] token. This probing task is conducted on the histMol -high dataset only, since 

the limited amount of data makes direct evaluation of section -level clinical information less representative. Each tile is 

assigned a pathological label based on expert pathologist annotations. 

For each classification task, performance was accessed through top1, top3, top5 classification accuracy, weighted F1 

score, and AUROC if not specific. Detailed evaluation settings are described in the following section. 

Architectural and pretraining optimization of SQUALL 

To verify the optimality of the SQUALL model architecture and to identify the effective hyperparameter configurations 

for pretraining, we leveraged the aforementioned probing tasks to perform a series of ablation studies and comprehensive 

hypermeters grid searches. These experiments were desig ned to evaluate how variations in architectural design and 

pretraining strategies influence model performance, thereby guiding the selection of the optimal SQUALL configuration. 

We conducted systematic ablation experiments to investigate the effects of: (1) model scale and training duration of 

SQUALL ; (2) different positional embedding schemes, with or without resolution as regulatory factor; (3) inclusion of 

Mus musculus data during pretraining; (4) including of data from multiple experimental platforms; (5) stain 

normalization of histological images; and (6) different stages of pretraining ( Figure S3E -S3I ). 

To access model scaling trends, we implemented both SQUALL -base and SQUALL -large variants for comparison. We 

further trained the model on either 30% or the full histMol -low corpus to evaluate the effect of dataset size, and across 

different training iterations to assess the influence of training duration. 

For positional embedding evaluation, we examined several alternatives: sinusoidal absolute position embeddings, 2D 

fixed rotary position embeddings (RoPE -2D), learnable relative position biases (initialized as model parameters), 

relative position embedding buckets (32 and 16 buckets, analogous to T5), and relative position encodings (encode 

through a simple neural network). We further tested the inclusion of token -level resolution as an auxiliary constraint, as 

well as combinations of absolute and relative embeddings. 

To evaluate the effect of including Mus musculus data, we retained only human tiles from 30% of the histMol -low 

dataset and trained for the same number of iterations as the corresponding subset of mixed data. The model was then 

evaluated on human cancer classification tasks. To assess the influence of data diversity across platforms, we performed 

training using only Visium tiles, excluding all others. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 54

For the ablation study on stain normalization as a preprocessing technique for histological images, we applied the 

Marchenko method to compute the median color vector of the histMol -low dataset and normalized all low -resolution 

images accordingly. 

Of note, these ablation experiments were primarily conducted on low -resolution data with shorter training schedules 

and were evaluated using simple classification tasks. Although not exhaustive, these experiments served as prototypes 

to assess model perfor mance and as a foundation for scaling up to large -scale pretraining. To evaluate the impact of 

different pretraining stages, we trained a SQUALL -large model from scratch (random initialization) as a baseline to 

assess the benefits of stage 1 pretraining parameter initialization, as well as directly applied stage 1 pretrained model 

for tile classification as baseline. 

For each stage, we performed an exhaustive grid search over key pretraining hyperparameters: 

• learning rate ∈ {5e−4, 2e−4, 2e−5, 1e−5 }, 

• batch size ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512, 1,024}. 

Comprehensive results, including optimal model parameters and architectural configurations, are summarized in the 

Table S8 -S25 .

Hardware and software 

All experiments and analyses were conducted in Python (version 3.8.13) using open -source libraries as specified below. 

Pretraining was performed on 32 NVIDIA H100 GPUs (80 GB memory each) distributed across multiple compute nodes, 

interconnected via NVLink for high -speed intra -node GPU communication and InfiniBand for inter -node connectivity. 

We used PyTorch (version 2.1.0, CUDA 12.1) with DistributedDataParallel (DDP) for large -scale multi -GPU training. 

During pretraining, images were loaded using the scikit -image package to ensure efficient data handling, and a custom 

data loader was implemented to optimize I/O operations with PyTorch. The total training durations were 177.3 hours 

for stage 1 and 26.8 ho urs for stage 2. Detailed GPU configurations and usage statistics for all ablation experiments are 

provided in the Table S24 and S25 .

Downstream evaluation experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (80 GB) unless otherwise 

specified. Model training and runtime performance were monitored using TensorBoard, which facilitated tracking of 

metrics and optimization of GPU utilizat ion. 

Virtual biomarker expression predictions 

Data and evaluation setting 

To evaluate SQUALL ’s virtual biomarker prediction performance, we used the Xenium Prime 5K Human Pan -Tissue 

& Pathways Panel dataset as the quantitative reference, given its single -molecule resolution and concordance with other 

spatial platforms in a recent benchmarking stu dy. 

Three Xenium5K tissue sections were used for benchmarking (Table S31 ): one from the SPATCH cohort 

(hepatocellular carcinoma) and two public datasets from 10x Genomics (ovarian cancer: 

https://www.10xgenomics.com/cn/datasets/xenium -prime -ffpe -human -ovarian -cancer ; cervical cancer: 

https://www.10xgenomics.com/cn/datasets/xenium -prime -ffpe -human -cervical -cancer ). Since VisiumHD sections 

from the same SPATCH tissue blocks were available during pretraining, SPATCH data were used for in -domain 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 55

evaluation, whereas the 10x datasets served as out -of -domain generalization tests. All datasets contained matched H&E 

images, spatial coordinates, and subcellular gene expression profiles. 

Six representative histology -based virtual biomarker prediction models were used for benchmarking : iSTA R, ST -Net, 

EGN, Hist2ST , DeepPT , and Path2Space (Table S 27 ). EGN, Hist2ST, DeepPT were s elected based on a recent 

benchmark study on lower resolution platforms based on performance and usability 46 . All competing models trained 

using two Visium HD sections from SPATCH to ensure fair comparison and the data -independen ce of evaluation on 

external cohorts .

iSTAR employs a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone that encodes local histology tiles into contextual embeddings, 

followed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) head for spatial gene expression regression. The model was originally 

developed for 10× Visium data u sing sparse matrix (mtx) input format. To adapt iSTAR for Visium HD training, we 

modified the data configuration by replacing the original mtx reader with a sparse -matrix parser while maintaining all 

preprocessing steps and hyperparameters consistent with the official configuration. The official implementation from 

the paper used a ViT -S/256 backbone pretrained with HIPT features derived from TCGA whole -slide images, and an 

MLP prediction head comprising four randomly initialized layerss. All histology images were processed at 20× 

magnification, corresponding to 2 μm per pixel. The model was trained for 400 epochs using the Adam optimizer under 

the same batch and learning rate settings as reported in the original paper. 

ST -Net utilizes a DenseNet -121 backbone pretrained on ImageNet to predict regional gene expression from H&E 

images. To adapt ST -Net for Visium HD, the H&E sections were tiled at 20× resolution into non -overlapping 224 × 224 

pixel patches, and each patch was used to predict the corresponding expression vector for its spatial barcode. The 

network employed a single fully connected prediction head initialized at random, resulting in approximately 7.98 million 

parameters. All other tra ining hyperparameters were kept consistent with the original implementation. 

Path2Space used CTransPath as the backbone for histology image feature extraction, followed by a MLP based neural 

network for transcriptomic prediction. In total, 50 models were trained on two SPATCH Visium HD sections, with 25 

models trained for each section using a 5 × 5 nested fold ensemble. The final predictions for all Xenium 5K sections 

were obtained by a veraging the outputs of all 50 ensemble members. All data preprocessing steps (including Macenko 

color normalization), training protocols, and hyperparameter settings followed the original study and its publicly 

available implementation, except that final predictions were generated at the 224 × 224 -pixel patch level. 

EGN, DeepPT, and Hist2ST were chosen according to better usability and superior performance from a benchmark 

study on low resolution Visium 55 μm spatial gene expression prediction. 

The EGN architecture consisted of an exemplar retrieval module and an exemplar -guided Transformer prediction 

network. First, a CNN encoder, ResNet -50 pretrained on ImageNet, was used to extract 2048 -dimensional visual 

embeddings from histology image patche s. These embeddings were used to retrieve visually similar exemplar spots 

from the reference data, which provided both image features and gene expression profiles as auxiliary guidance for each 

query spot. The main prediction network followed the original EGN design, where image patches were processed by a 

Vision Transformer backbone and exemplar image features and expression profiles were incorporated through Exemplar 

Bridging blocks to revise the intermediate image representations. The resulting represent ation was passed to an 

attention -based prediction block and regression head to predict spatial gene expression. To adapt EGN to Visium HD 

data, we aggregated bin -level expression into tile -level profiles and resized the gene -dimension -specific projection a nd 

output layers to match the full HD gene dimension. EGN was implemented in Python and PyTorch using 224 × 224 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 56

input image patches, with ResNet -50 used for exemplar retrieval rather than as the main prediction backbone. The EGN 

component was trained from scratch for 50 epochs with a batch size of 32. The ViT backbone used a patch size of 32, 

an embedding dimension of 1024, a feedforward dimension of 4096, 16 attention heads and a depth of 8. The Exemplar 

Bridging block was integrated with the ViT backbone at a frequency of 2, with 16 heads and a dimension of 64, using 

the 16 nearest exemplars. The model was trained with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 a cosine annealing scheduler and a 

weight decay of 10 −4. The optimization objective combined mean squared error loss and batch -wise Pearson correlation 

coefficient loss. 

DeepPT was adapted as a CNN -based method for tile -level spatial gene expression prediction. The implemented model 

architecture for benchmarking followed the original DeepPT design and consisted of a convolutional neural network, 

an autoencoder and a multi -layer perceptron. Image tiles were extracted from the H&E image, resized to 224 × 224 

pixels and processed with Macenko stain normalization befo re feature extraction. A ResNet -50 CNN pretrained on 

ImageNet was used as the image encoder, with the final fully connected classification layer removed. The output after 

global average pooling was used as a 2048 -dimensional tile -level image representation . This representation was passed 

into an autoencoder, which compressed the 2048 -dimensional feature into a 512 -dimensional latent vector to reduce 

dimensionality, mitigate sparsity, reduce noise and limit overfitting. The compressed representation was then used as 

input to a three -layer MLP regression head to predict gene expression jointly across all genes in a multi -task regression 

setting. DeepPT was implemented in Python and PyTorch using hyperparameter values following the original DeepPT 

settings where applicable. The autoencoder and MLP were trained for a maximum of 500 epochs with a learning rate of 

1 × 10−4. Dropout was set to 0.2 in the MLP, and image rotations were applied during training as data augmentation. 

The model was optimized using mean squared error loss between predicted and ground -truth gene expression values. 

To adapt DeepPT to tile -level spatial transcriptomic prediction , the original slide -level aggregation step was removed 

and predictions were retained at the tile level. 

Hist2ST is a deep -learning method for predicting spatial gene expression from histology images. The model consists of 

three main components: a ConvMixer -based image encoder, a Transformer module and a graph neural network. In our 

implementation, histology image patches of 224 × 224 pixels were extracted around each spatial location and used as 

image inputs. Each patch was embedded by the ConvMixer module to extract local visual representations, which were 

then fused with learnable spatial coordinate embeddi ngs to incorporate positional information. These spatially enriched 

representations were processed by the Transformer module to model global dependencies among spatial locations, 

followed by the GNN module to aggregate information from spatially neighboring patches and enhance local spatial 

consistency. The output representation was passed to a linear gene prediction head to predict spatial gene expression. 

To support Visium HD and Xenium -style tile -level inputs, each image tile was treated as a graph node, and local spatial 

neighborhoods were defined based on tile coordinates. Hist2ST was implemented in Python and PyTorch by following 

the original Hist2ST codebase as closely as possible. The model was randomly initialized and did not use an external 

pretrained image encoder. Apart from the tile -level input adaptation and the use of all common genes shared between 

the training and test datasets, the original Hist2ST model components, including the ConvMixer, Transformer, GNN, 

zero -inflated negative binomial heads and self -distillation module, were retained. Hist2ST was trained for 350 epochs ，

learning rate of 1e -5, dropout of 0.2, ZINB loss coefficient of 0.25, self -distillation with five augmented image patches 

and a distillation coefficient of 0.5. The architecture tag was set to 5 -7-2-8-4-16 -32, corresponding to a ConvMixer 

kernel size of 5 , patch embedding size of 7, ConvMixer depth of 2, Transformer depth of 8, GNN depth of 4, 16 attention 

heads and 32 convolutional channels. Random grayscale transformation, rotation and horizontal flipping were applied 

for self -distillation. Gene expressi on counts were library -size normalized and transformed using log(1 + x). The model 

was trained using the sum of mean squared error, ZINB loss and self -distillation loss. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 57

To evaluate performance of virtual biomarker expression prediction, we compared model -predicted expression profiles 

with ground -truth measurements from the Xenium5K dataset. To enable spatially resolved comparisons, similar to 

previous reported protocols , we first up -sampled the tile -level predictions from SQUALL (originally of dimension 

56×56×15,757 per tile) to match the resolution of 224×224×15,757. The up -sampled tiles were then reassembled 

according to their corresponding H&E -stained images to reconstruct whole -slide prediction profiles. To correct for 

techni cal variation and ensure comparability across tiles, predicted expression maps were quantile normalized. Because 

the Xenium5K platform produces expression profiles at higher spatial resolution, the ground -truth expression values 

were correspondingly down -sampled and quantile normalized to match the resolution of the predictions. 

For each gene in the panel, similarity between predicted and ground -truth expression maps was quantified using Pearson 

correlation coefficient, defined as 

r = ∑ (xi−x̅ )(yi−y̅ )N    

> i=1
> √∑(xi−x̅)2N
> i=1√∑(yi−y̅)2N
> i=1

.

Generalization to clinical cohort: Public data and gene set collections 

To evaluate the generalization capability of SQUALL ’s virtual biomarker prediction in a clinical context, we tested the 

model on TCGA -LIHC and TCGA -CESC slides labeled as DX (diagnostic). These slides were derived from formalin -

fixed, paraffin -embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), representing the standard 

material routinely used in clinical pathology practice. 

Publicly available region annotations 49 delineating malignant and non -malignant areas were collected and reformatted 

into polygon objects to serve as spatial region labels for evaluation ( Figure 2H). Tumor -associated gene signatures were 

curated from public sources and intersected with the histMol gene list to ensure consistent feature representation across 

datasets. 

For T cell related evaluations, curated cell type marker gene sets were used: " CD3D "," CD3E "," CD3G " (general T cell 

signature), " CD4 " (general CD4⁺ T cell signature), " CD3G "," CD8A "," GZMK " (general CD8⁺ T cell signature), " CD8A ", 

"GZMA ", "GZMK "," IFNG "," PRF1 "," NKG7 "," TNFRSF9 " (effector CD8⁺ T cell subset), and 

"CD8A "," CTLA4 "," PDCD1 "," LAG3 "," TIGIT "," HAVCR2 "," LAYN "," ENTPD1 " (exhausted CD8⁺ T cell subset). These 

curated gene sets allowed a more interpretable and functionally meaningful assessment of the model’s predictive 

performance for clinically important biomarkers. 

Generalization to clinical cohort: Evaluation settings 

To evaluate the virtual biomarker expression prediction capability of SQUALL in a real -world diagnostic context, we 

applied the pretrained model to every slide in each cohort. Each whole -slide image was downsampled to 20× 

magnification and tiled into non -overlapping 224 × 224 μm patches. For each input tile, SQUALL generated a 56 × 56 

predicted expression matrix per gene. The predicted gene expression values were then aggregated across all spatial 

positions within each tile to form a pseudobulk representation, which substantially accelerated downstream analysis 

give n that each slide contained approximately 10,000 tiles ( Figure 2A) .

After obtaining tile -level biomarker expression predictions for every sample, all predicted expression values within a 

slide were reverse -rank normalized to account for scale variation across genes and slides. For each gene  𝑔  , the 

normalized expression value for the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ tile was computed as 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 58

𝑥 𝑖 ,𝑔  

> norm

= Φ−1( 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑔 

𝑛 𝑔 + 1),

where  𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑔  denotes the rank of tile  𝑖  among all  𝑛 𝑔  tiles within the same sample, and  Φ−1 is the inverse normal 

cumulative distribution function. 

For survival analysis, gene expression features were summarized either in pseudobulk manner ( Figure 2G) or at the 

sample level ( Figure 2I) using within -tumor rank expression (TR) .TR was computed by averaging the rank -normalized 

expression values across tumor -annotated tiles only. The tumor fraction for each sample was defined as the proportion 

of tumor tiles among all tiles. 

Associations between gene expression and patient survival were evaluated using multivariate Cox proportional hazards 

regression models, adjusting for clinical covariates including age, tumor stage, and tumor fraction. Gene expression 

values were z -score no rmalization for within -tumor rank features to improve comparability across samples. Hazard 

ratios, confidence intervals, and significance values were estimated for each gene, and multiple testing correction was 

performed using the Benjamini -Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) procedure. All analyses were done in Python 

(lifelines v0.27) and visualized using forest plots and correlation rank plot to assess the predictive potential of each 

feature. 

Tissue pathological structure annotations 

To assess the performance of tissue pathological structure annotation, a subset of the histMol -low dataset was drawn for 

evaluation ( Figure 3B). In addition, we included newly released publicly available cohorts that were never exposed to 

SQUALL ’s pretraining process to evaluate the model’s generalizability. Below, we describe the datasets used for 

evaluation, the benchmark settings, and the blind reader study conducted to assess model performance on unseen data. 

Data and reference pathological annotation for evaluation 

A subset of histMol -low data was randomly selected to ensure comprehensive coverage of anatomical tissues while 

preserving cohort integrity for direct internal evaluation ( Table S 33 ). The selected samples included sections from lung, 

soft tissue 56 , breast, pancreas, liver, cervix, lymph node, and head and neck. To generate reference annotations for 

evaluation, three experienced pathologists independently annotated the histological images of the tissue sections 

according to their corresponding anato mical and pathological characteristics. Annotation masks were subsequently 

assigned to each sequencing spot and used as ground -truth references for evaluation. 

To assess model generalization, we additionally included two independent cohorts, mouse breast tumors and human 

thyroid cancers, that were never exposed during model pretraining ( Table S 33 ). For these cohorts, we did not provide 

manual annotations; instead, a blind reader study was conducted to evaluate annotation performance, given the 

subjective nature of pathological interpretation. 

Benchmark against other competing models 

For unsupervised annotation of tissue pathological structures in Visium data, the stage 1 pretrained SQUALL model 

was employed as a feature extractor ( Figure 3A). Corresponding H&E histology images and/or pseudo -labeled gene 

expression matrices were used as inputs. The SQUALL image and expression encoders independently generated 

modality -specific embeddings, which were concatenated to form a unified multimodal representation. Both image -only 

and image -expression configurations were evaluated. The resulting fused embeddings wer e clustered using K -means 

(with fixed K = 10 for simplicity) to define pathological regions. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 59

We benchmarked SQUALL against two state -of -the -art multimodal approaches: MISO (Multi -modal Spatial Omics) 

and SpatialGlue, as well as two unimodal method s: direct K -means clustering of the mean RGB vector per Visium spot 

histology image, and direct leiden clustering of the normalized expression profile per spots ( Table S 34 ). 

MISO learns modality -specific embeddings and explicitly models pairwise cross -modal interactions before joint 

integration and clustering. It combines neural feature extractors with interaction terms to produce a shared latent space 

that captures both modal ity -specific and cross -modal variance. MISO was implemented following the authors’ official 

configuration, using normalized Visium gene -expression matrices and RGB histology embeddings extracted from H&E 

images via a pretrained convolutional backbone. Feat ures were computed at 0.5 μm per pixel (corresponding to a ~55 

μm spot radius). All modalities and interaction terms were jointly optimized for 200 iterations on an NVIDIA A100 

GPU (80 GB memory, random seed = 100). The learned latent representations were clustered into spatial domains using 

MISO’s internal K -means routine. 

SpatialGlue is a graph neural -network (GNN) framework designed to integrate spatial and molecular features via a dual -

attention mechanism. The model performs intra -omics attention to capture spatial or transcriptional dependencies within 

each modality, fol lowed by cross -modality attention fusion to generate a unified spatial embedding. In this study, 

SpatialGlue was applied following the official tutorial (refer to “Data integration for human lymph node, 10x Genomics 

Visium”) using PyTorch with GPU accelera tion (A100 GPU, 80 GB, random seed = 2022). Inputs included H&E RGB 

features and normalized, log -transformed Visium RNA expression data. The top 3,000 highly variable genes were 

selected for PCA, and the number of retained principal components matched the image -feature dimension. Two 

neighborhood graphs were constructed, spatial (physical adjacency) and feature (transcriptional similarity), each with k 

= 10 nearest neighbors. The model trained for 200 epochs to jointly optimize intra - and cross -modality att ention. The 

resulting latent embeddings (“SpatialGlue representation”) were clustered using mclust, following the authors’ 

recommendation. 

To quantitatively assess clustering performance, the pathologist -annotated tissue structures in the in -house Visium 

dataset were used as the ground truth. The annotation outputs obtained from SQUALL , MISO, SpatialGlue, K -means, 

and Scanpy were compared against the histology -based annotations using three metrics: Normalized Mutual Information 

(NMI), Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI), and Adjusted Rand Index (ARI). 

NMI measures the mutual dependence between the predicted region assignments and the ground -truth annotations, 

normalized to the range [0,1] 

NMI (𝑈 , 𝑉 ) = 2 × 𝐼 (𝑈 ; 𝑉 )

𝐻 (𝑈 ) + 𝐻 (𝑉 )

where  𝐼 (𝑈 ; 𝑉 )denotes the mutual information between the proposed region labels by the model  𝑈  and the true labels 

𝑉 , and  𝐻 (⋅) represents Shannon entropy. A higher NMI indicates stronger agreement between proposed and reference 

tissue partitions. 

AMI corrects the raw mutual information for chance agreement, providing a fairer comparison across datasets with 

differing region sizes: where  𝔼 [𝐼 (𝑈 ; 𝑉 )]is the expected mutual information under random labeling. AMI values range 

from 0 (random agreement) to 1 (perfect correspondence). 

ARI evaluates the similarity between two region assignments by considering all pairs of samples and counting those 

that are assigned consistently in both annotations. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 60

ARI =

∑ (nij  

> 2

)ij − ∑ (ai 

> 2

)i ∑ (bj 

> 2

)j

(n

> 2

)

1

2 (∑ (ai 

> 2

)i + ∑ (bj 

> 2

)j ) − ∑ (ai 

> 2

)i ∑ (bj 

> 2

)j

(n

> 2

)

where  𝑛 𝑖𝑗  is the number of samples shared between the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎtrue annotation and the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ proposed annotation,  𝑎 𝑖  and 

𝑏 𝑗  are the corresponding annotation marginal sums, and  𝑛  is the total number of samples. ARI values also range from 

0 (random labeling) to 1 (perfect annotation match). 

Blind reader study to access model generalization 

To evaluate whether SQUALL can reliably perform tissue pathological structure annotation on unseen data, we 

conducted a generalizability validation using two independent spatial transcriptomics datasets: human thyroid cancer 

and mouse orthotopic breast cancer, neither of which was included during model training. Each dataset comprised high -

resolution spatial transcriptomic sections derived from distinct tissue sources and processing batches, thereby providing 

a stringent test of model generalization. 

Four board -certified pathologists, each with at least five years of diagnostic experience, independently reviewed the 

annotation results generated by five pathological annotation methods, including SQUALL and four competing 

approaches. The experts were blinded to the model identities and did not interact with the models or each other during 

evaluation. For each sample, the pathologists scored the segmentation and labeling quality accordingly to clinical 

practice. Scores were given based on annotation quality ranking (1 = poor, 5 = excellent) and aggregated per model 

(Figure 3M and 3N).

For pairwise comparisons between SQUALL and each competing method, we defined “Win” when the expert score for 

SQUALL was higher, “Tie” when the scores were equal, and “Loss” when lower. The Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for 

each method was computed as the average rating across all pathologists and samples: 

MOS = 1

> Nraters ×Nsamples

∑ ∑ sij  

> Nsamples
> j=1
> Nraters
> i=1

,

where  𝑠 𝑖𝑗  denotes the score assigned by rater  𝑖  to sample  𝑗 .

We further calculated the win rate as the proportion of samples in which SQUALL achieved higher MOS than a 

comparator model across all four raters. This evaluation framework provided a quantitative and expert -validated 

benchmark for assessing SQUALL ’s capability to generalize tissue annotation performance to previously unseen 

histopathological sections. 

Spatially resolved niche -niche interaction analysis 

To characterize intercellular communication between spatial niches, ligand -receptor interaction analysis was performed 

across spatial proximity clusters (Figure 3L). Ligand -receptor interactions between spatial proximity clusters were 

evaluated by assessing ligand expression in the source cluster and receptor expression in the target cluster. Statistical 

significance of each interaction was estimated using permutatio n testing. Interactions with detectable ligand expression 

were retained, and ligand -receptor pairs were ranked according to their statistical significance for each source -target 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 61

cluster combination. The top -ranked representative interactions were selected to summarize niche -to -niche signaling 

relationships. 

Differential expression analysis 

Gene expression matrices were normalized to a constant library size of 10,000 counts per cell or spot and subsequently 

log -transformed. Highly variable genes were identified based on expression variability across the dataset, and the top 

2,000 genes were r etained for downstream analyses. Cluster -specific differential gene expression was determined by 

comparing each cluster with all remaining clusters using the Wilcoxon rank -sum test. Genes with an adjusted p -value < 

0.05 and log fold change greater than 0.0 5 were considered significantly upregulated. 

Identification of breast cancer progression trajectory 

All breast sections were selected from histMol -low corpus and underwent rigorous metadata cleaning. Each case’s 

pathological characteristics were manually rechecked based on histology images and corresponding pathological reports, 

if available, from the original publications. 

Overall, we retained 111 sections across 10 studies, totaling 233,219 spots for Visium and 87 sections across 33 patients, 

totaling 38,103 spots for ST. These sections span multiple molecular and pathological subtypes of breast cancer ( Table 

S38 ). To mitigate platform -specific artifacts that could hinder biological discovery ( Figure S6A and S6H ), we used 

Visium data for primary discovery analyses, reserving ST data for cross -validation ( Figure 4A ). 

PAM50 subtype assignment 

Raw expression data of individual spots from the spatial transcriptomics (ST) dataset were aggregated into pseudobulk 

RNA expression profiles per sections. The resulting pseudobulk expression matrix was log₂ -transformed with a 

pseudocount of 1 to stabilize variance. 

For each gene g, the expected expression level across all samples was estimated as the arithmetic mean  𝑥 

> ‾
> 𝑔

, and gene -

wise mean normalization was applied by transforming each observation as  𝑥 ’𝑔 ,𝑖 = 𝑥 𝑔 ,𝑖 /𝑥 

> ‾
> 𝑔

. This normalization removed 

gene -level mean effects and reduced between -gene scale differences, yielding expression values suitable for 

comparative modeling. 

The normalized matrix was then linearly rescaled using genefu::rescale , which projects gene -wise expression values 

onto a common [0,1] range to ensure comparability across genes during centroid correlation. PAM50 molecular subtypes 

were subsequently inferred using genefu::molecular.subtyping (sbt.model="pam50") based on the rescaled expression 

matrix and the pretrained PAM50 classification centroids 78 (Figure S6G ). For each pseudobulk sample, the procedure 

returned the predicted intrinsic subtype: Luminal A, Luminal B, HER2 -enriched, Basal -like, or Normal -like, along with 

centroid correlation scores and subtype probabilities, where applicable. 

To evaluate classification reliability, PAM50 -assigned subtypes were compared with curated clinical molecular subtype 

annotations, and concordance was assessed using Cohen’s kappa (κ) statistic. 

Embedding cohort level spot data through SQUALL 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 62

For each spot, given that the spatial resolution of a spot is typically larger than that of a single token and considering th e

limited input window size of Vision Transformers (ViT), we developed a spot -averaging method to resample the feature 

map and obta in a robust representation for each spot ( Figure S6B ). 

Specifically, for each tissue section, we first partitioned it into overlapping tiles with a one -token stride and passed them 

through the frozen SQUALL encoder to generate detailed token -level feature maps that capture local neighborhood 

interactions. We then performed spot averaging, where each token was weighted according to its interaction area with 

the corresponding spot. Embedding of histology image token and gene expression token of the same spatial location 

were concatenated to obtain a 2048 -dimension vector. This process yielded a location -aware, fine -grained embedding 

for each spot, enabling consistent and biologically meaningful representation a cross the cohort. 

Pathological region enrichment analysis 

After obtained spots’ embedding from SQUALL , the embeddings were then clustered with K -means clustering. The 

final cluster numbered were selected based on trade -off to capture enough between -group diversity while not over -

fragmenting the biological groups. Follows clustering spots’ embedding into r ecurrent groups, leveraging corresponding 

pathological annotation and sections’ subtype labels, we assay clusters enrichment across different pathological region 

and subtypes. 

To assess whether specific clusters were preferentially enriched within certain pathological subtypes or regions, we 

performed a one -versus -all enrichment analysis using odds ratios (OR) and two -sided Fisher’s exact tests at the spot 

level ( Figure 4F ). For each subtype or region label, we compared the frequency of spots belonging to a given cluster 

(e.g., cluster  𝑖 ) against all remaining clusters combined. A 2×2 contingency table was then constructed for each 

comparison, where rows represented the presence or absence of the target region/subtype label, and columns represented 

whether a spot belonged to cluster  𝑖  or to any other cluster. 

The OR quantified the strength and direction of association between the cluster and the region/subtype, with OR > 1 

indicating enrichment of that cluster within the specified region/subtype. Statistical significance was determined using 

a two -sided Fisher’ s exact test, testing the null hypothesis of no enrichment. Multiple testing correction was performed 

using the Benjamini -Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method. Clusters with FDR < 0.05 were considered 

significantly enriched and retained for evaluatio n. 

Diffusion trajectory analysis 

Following the enrichment analysis, clusters that were (i) significantly enriched within tumor regions and (ii) exhibited 

enrichment patterns across different pathological subtypes were selected for diffusion trajectory analysis. Specially, 

clusters signifi cantly enriched in tumor regions and spanning diverse breast pathologies were cluster 8 (OR: MBC=5.77, 

FDR<10 -300 ; IDC=1.12, FDR=1.74×10 -4), cluster 10 (IDC=2.84, FDR<10 -300 ; M pBC=1.72, FDR=2.33×10 -52 ), cluster 

15 (M pBC=1.40, FDR=6.58×110 -52 ; IDC=1.80, FDR=4.54×10 -56 ), cluster 33 (DCIS=6.41, FDR<10 -300 ; IDC=40.20, 

FDR<10 -300 ), and cluster 34 (M pBC=1.28, FDR = 1.43×10 -16 ; ILC=2.20, FDR = 6.30×10 -40 ). 

Principal component analysis (PCA) was first applied for dimensionality reduction, and the top 32 principal components 

were used to construct a diffusion graph capturing the manifold of pathogenesis. Diffusion components were then 

computed using Scanpy (sc .tl.diffmap, n_comps=10), yielding a low -dimensional representation that reflects the 

continuum of progression states among tumor spots. The continuous pathological progression order of breast cancer 

subtypes along the diffusion manifold was inferred by di ffusion pseudotime (DPT) analysis implemented in Scanpy 

(sc.tl.dpt, n_dcs=4). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 63

Correspondence of ST data to Visium data 

To establish correspondence between the ST dataset and the Visium dataset, human breast cancer ST sections were first 

encoded using the SQUALL encoder, following the same preprocessing and feature extraction procedure applied to the 

Visium data. The resulting ST embeddings were subsequently clustered using the same strategy as described above for 

the Visium dataset, ensuring comparable cluster g ranularity across platforms. 

To quantitatively assess the correspondence between ST and Visium -derived clusters, we computed the cosine similarity 

between the feature embeddings of each ST spot and those of all Visium spots ( Figure S6K ). For each ST cluster, the 

median cosine similarity was calculated against every Visium cluster. The Visium cluster with the highest median 

similarity was then assigned as the corresponding counterpart for that ST cluster, defining a robust cross -platform 

mapping at the cluster level. 

This procedure enabled a direct comparison of clusters identified across sequencing technologies and subsequently used 

to assay enrichment patterns across different molecular subtypes. 

Survival analysis 

Survival data and gene by count expression matrix of TCGA -BRCA cohort were downloaded from the UCSC Xena. 

Genes were ranked according to their Pearson correlation with Visium pseudo -time, and signatures were defined using 

the top or bottom correlated genes . A weighted risk score was calculated for each sample as the sum of gene expression 

values multiplied by the corresponding signed correlation coefficients. Patients were stratified into high - and low -risk 

groups using the median risk score as the cutoff. Survival analysis was performed in the TNBC subset using the R 

package survival (v3.5.7). 

Identification of ovarian cancer recurrence associated niches 

All ovarian cancer were selected from histMol -high corpus and underwent rigorous metadata cleaning. Each case’s 

pathological characteristics were manually rechecked based on histology images and corresponding pathological reports. 

Overall, we retained 55 sections, totaling 536,823,616 sequencing bins or 171,181 tiles from 55 patients. The majority 

of the sections were sourced from High -Grade Serous Ovarian Carcinoma (HGSOC) ( Table S41 ). To reduce 

computational burdens as well as obtain a region level (112 um) summarization of tumor microenvironments, for each 

transcriptomics -histology image tiles’ token sequence, we concatenated a constant [CLS] token and pass the entire token 

sequence s though SQUALL ’s freeze encoder. Subsequently, the final [CLS] tokens representation for each tile were 

used for discoveries ( Figure 5A ). 

After hierarchical clustering, clinical endpoint and pathological region labels were used for enrichment analysis, by 

levering similar protocol as described in Identification of breast cancer progression continuum sections. 

Cell type segmentation and classification 

CellViT++, using SAM -L as its backbone architecture, was employed for simultaneous cell segmentation and 

classification from H&E histology images 83 . The model was trained to categorize individual cells into five major 

histopathological classes: connective, inflammatory, neoplastic, epithelial, and dead cells. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 64

Following segmentation, the classified cell masks were aggregated within each spatial tile to quantify cell -type 

composition and to calculate proportional differences across tissue regions. These spatially resolved cellular 

distributions were subsequently used for downstream spatial correlation and phenotypic association analyses. 

Clinical prognostics predictions 

Only cancer types represented within the histMol -high corpus were selected as independent cohorts for prognostic 

prediction evaluation. To assess model generalization, we evaluated the same cancer cohort from the TCGA consortium, 

chosen for their well -curated clinical metadata encompassing patient survi val endpoints and treatment histories. In 

addition, an in -house ovarian cancer (OC) cohort was included as an external validation set, providing detailed clinical 

annotations for independent benchmarking ( Table S45 -S48 ). All slides were downsampled to 20× resolution to ensure 

scale equivalent. Below, we detail the procedures for data collection, prediction modeling, and performance evaluation. 

Histological imaging 

Formalin -fixed, paraffin -embedded (FFPE) clinical tissue sections were collected from pathology archives following 

institutional ethical approval and standard biospecimen handling protocols. All samples were sectioned at a thickness 

of 4 -5 μm, mounted on g lass slides, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) according to routine clinical 

procedures. 

Slides were digitized using a whole -slide scanner (Olympus SLIDEVIEW VS200) at 40× optical magnification, 

corresponding to a spatial resolution of approximately 0.25 μm per pixel. The resulting whole -slide images (WSIs) were 

stored in high -resolution digit al format (TIFF) for downstream computational analyses. 

All FFPE samples were derived from clinically annotated cases, ensuring the availability of associated diagnostic and 

prognostic metadata such as tumor grade, histological subtype, and clinical outcomes. 

Survival and treatment prediction 

For survival prediction, we adopted the same ABMIL framework described above to aggregate tile -level embeddings 

into a patient -level representation. Instead of a classification head, the aggregated embedding was mapped to a scalar 

log -risk score, which was optimized under the Cox proportional hazards model. Specifically, for each patient with 

observed survival time  t𝑖 , event indicator  𝛿 𝑖 , and predicted log -risk  l𝑖 , the objective was to maximize the Cox partial 

likelihood 

ℒcox = ∏ exp (l𝑖 )

∑ exp (l𝑗 )𝑗 ∈ℛ(𝑖 )𝑖 : 𝛿 𝑖 =1

where  ℛ(𝑖 ) denotes the risk set of patients still under observation at time  t𝑖 . Model training minimized the negative 

log -partial likelihood, ensuring that uncensored events guided the ordering of predicted risks, while censored 

observations contributed only through their inclusion in the risk sets 114 . Model development and evaluation were carried 

out using a 5 -fold cross -validation scheme on TCGA cohorts and in -house ovarian cancer cohort. Predictive 

performance was quantified using Harrell’s concordance index (c -index), and the learned attention weig hts also 

provided interpretability by highlighting histologic regions most influential in shaping patient -level risk estimates. 

For downstream analysis of survival prediction, we integrated the five -fold cross -validation results in a faired manner 

by retaining only patients with stage I/II disease for subsequent evaluation. Predicted risk scores were robustly 

normalized across fold s and then merged into a single dataset. The optimal cutoff value for the normalized risk scores 

to stratify patients was determined 115 . Based on this dichotomization, we calculated hazard ratios with corresponding 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 65

95% confidence intervals and performed Kaplan -Meier survival analyses to visualize survival differences between 

groups. Statistical significance of the separation was assessed, and the resulting Kaplan -Meier curves with annotated 

HRs provided an interpretable summary of the prognostic value of the pre dicted risk scores. 

For treatment prediction tasks, we focused on platinum -based chemotherapy resistance prediction . Platinum -based 

chemotherapy resistance is defined by disease progression within 6 months of completing a platinum -based regimen .

It is divided into sensitive (progression -free survival >6 months) and resistant/ refractory (progression -free survival <6 

months) following clinical guidelines 87 . We curated patient -level platinum resistance information from both the in -house 

ovarian cancer cohort and TCGA -OV cohort. The combined dataset was randomly partitioned into five folds to enable 

cross -validation at the patient level. Model construction and evaluation followed by employing an ABMIL fr amework 

with cross -entropy optimization, and performance were reported using in top -1, top -3, and top -5 classification accuracy, 

F1 -score, and AUC. 

Benchmark against other foundation model 

For fair comparative analyses with other pathological foundation models ( Table S43 and S44 ), we implemented feature 

extraction using open -source frameworks: CLAM (https://github.com/mahmoodlab/CLAM) 116 for UNI, and modified 

implementations of PLIP and Virchow based on the timm library ( https://huggingface.com ) based on corresponding 

methods’ reported protocols. Benchmark models were open source parameters were obtained from the Hugging Face 

Model Hub including: PLIP ( https://huggingface.co/vinid/plip ),UNI( https://huggingface.co/MahmoodLab/UNI ), and 

Virchow ( https://huggingface.co/paige -ai/Virchow ). 

Interpretable analysis: Correlation risk score with RNA expression 

For correlation analysis between model predicted survival risk and bulk RNA -seq expression profiles, bulk RNA -seq 

profiles were restricted to only primary tumor samples, aggregated to the patient level by averaging replicate libraries 

from the same case, a nd transformed using log₂(1+x). To reduce compositional effects, gene expression vectors were 

normalized within each patient by dividing by the patient’s total expression (i.e., converted to relative abundance). The 

resulting matrix was merged with normali zed survival risk scores. For each gene, association with risk was quantified 

using the Pearson correlation across patients ( Figure 5J ). Genes were ranked by correlation, and the top and bottom 5% 

(positively vs. negatively associated) were selected for visualization and pathway enrichment analysis. To visualize 

cohort -level gene expression trends along the model -predicted risk, patients were ordered by their risk scores. For each 

selected gene, we fitted a univariate smooth curve of expression versus risk using penalized regression splines (basis 

dimension k = 60). The fitted values were used to construct a smoothed expression matrix, wh ich was standardized by 

gene (z -score) and clipped to the range [−2, 2] to reduce the influence of outliers. The final heatmap displays z -scored, 

smoothed expression profiles of top and bottom gene sets across patients sorted by risk, illustrating how gene expression 

changes with increasing predicted risk. 

Interpretable analysis: Pathological inspection of attention heatmap 

Tile -level attention scores were derived from ABMIL module of SQUALL , in which each tile’s attention weight 

quantifies its relative contribution to the section -level prediction. To visualize the spatial distribution of these learned 

attentions, we constructed section -level heatmaps by combining the spatial coordinates of a ll tiles with their 

corresponding attention weights ( Figure 5K and 5L ). 

For each whole -slide image (WSI), the attention scores were min -max normalized and contrast -enhanced using a power -

law transformation to emphasize regions with high discriminative importance. A continuous attention field was then 

generated by interpolating the normalized tile scores across the entire tissue section using a KD -tree -based nearest -

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 66

neighbor interpolation strategy, which preserves spatial locality while maintaining smooth transitions between adjacent 

tiles. Each tile was modeled as a 256 -pixel square region, and overlapping tiles were averaged to ensure continuity. 

Regions with insuff icient tile coverage were masked to suppress boundary artifacts, and mild Gaussian smoothing was 

applied to further enhance spatial coherence. 

The resulting attention field was blended with the original H&E image in RGBA color space with an opacity of 0.6. 

Regions outside the valid tissue coverage were rendered as white background. This visualization provides intuitive 

interpretability by highlig hting morphologically relevant tissue regions that most strongly influenced the model’s 

predictions. 

Besides, two experienced pathologists randomly selected 20× fields guided by the attention heatmap generated by the 

model. Each 20× field was obtained under the same magnification and from comparable tissue regions. Quantification 

of mitotic figures and id entification of pathological structures were subsequently performed using QuPath, and the 

resulting measurements were cross validated between the two pathologists ( Figure S8F ). 

Over representation enrichment analysis 

Functional enrichment of the gene sets was performed using both Gene Ontology (GO) and MSigDB Hallmark gene 

sets. For GO, the Biological Process (BP) ontology for homo sapiens was used as the reference annotation. For MSigDB, 

curated Hallmark pathways were employed to evaluate enrichment of core transcriptional programs. Over -

representation significance was evaluated using a hypergeometric model, and multiple testing correction was performed 

with the Benjamini –Hochberg procedure. Enrichment results were ran ked according to adjusted p -values and 

enrichment ratios and visualized as bar plots displaying  − log 10  adjusted p -values for selected pathways. The same 

procedure was applied to analyze genes correlated with the prognostic trajectory in breast cancer. For the enrichment 

analysis of top differentially expressed genes in the TAIE niche, only GO Biological Pr ocess enrichment was performed. 

For all analysis, only top enriched, non -redundancy term were shown. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 67

# Reference 

1. Cross, S.S. (1998). Grading and scoring in histopathology. Histopathology 33 , 99 -106. 

10.1046/j.1365 -2559.1998.00495.x. 

2. Kumar, V., Abbas, A.K., and Aster, J.C. (2024). Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease, 11 

Edition (Elsevier). 

3. Wang, K., Kumar, T., Wang, J., Minussi, D.C., Sei, E., Li, J., Tran, T.M., Thennavan, A., Hu, M., 

Casasent, A.K., et al. (2023). Archival single -cell genomics reveals persistent subclones during DCIS 

progression. Cell 186 , 3968 -3982.e3915. 10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.024. 

4. Jin, X., Demere, Z., Nair, K., Ali, A., Ferraro, G.B., Natoli, T., Deik, A., Petronio, L., Tang, A.A., Zhu, 

C., et al. (2020). A metastasis map of human cancer cell lines. Nature 588 , 331 -336. 10.1038/s41586 -

020 -2969 -2. 

5. Jiang, P., Gu, S., Pan, D., Fu, J., Sahu, A., Hu, X., Li, Z., Traugh, N., Bu, X., Li, B., et al. (2018). 

Signatures of T cell dysfunction and exclusion predict cancer immunotherapy response. Nature 

Medicine 24 , 1550 -1558. 10.1038/s41591 -018 -0136 -1. 

6. Uhlen, M., Zhang, X. -C., Lee, S., Sjostedt, E., Fagerberg, L., Bidkhori, G., Benfeitas, R., Arif, M., Liu, 

Z., Edfors, F., et al. (2017). A pathology atlas of the human cancer transcriptome. Science 357 , 660. 

10.1126/science.aan2507. 

7. Gulati, G.S., D’Silva, J.P., Liu, Y., Wang, L., and Newman, A.M. (2025). Profiling cell identity and 

tissue architecture with single -cell and spatial transcriptomics. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 

26 , 11 -31. 10.1038/s41580 -024 -00768 -2. 

8. Cooper, L.A.D., Demicco, E.G., Saltz, J.H., Powell, R.T., Rao, A., and Lazar, A.J. (2018). PanCancer 

insights from The Cancer Genome Atlas: the pathologist's perspective. The Journal of Pathology 244 ,

512 -524. 10.1002/path.5028. 

9. Shmatko, A. (2022). Artificial intelligence in histopathology: enhancing cancer research and clinical 

oncology. Nature Cancer 3, 1026 -1038. 10.1038/s43018 -022 -00436 -4. 

10. Ståhl, P.L., Salmén, F., Vickovic, S., Lundmark, A., Fernández Navarro, J., Magnusson, J., 

Giacomello, S., Asp, M., Westholm, J.O., Huss, M., et al. (2016). Visualization and analysis of gene 

expression in tissue sections by spatial transcriptomics. Scienc e 353 , 78 -82. 

10.1126/science.aaf2403. 

11. Erickson, A., He, M., Berglund, E., Marklund, M., Mirzazadeh, R., Schultz, N., Kvastad, L., Andersson, 

A., Bergenstrahle, L., Bergenstrahle, J., et al. (2022). Spatially resolved clonal copy number 

alterations in benign and malignant tissue. Nature 608 , 360 -367. 10.1038/s41586 -022 -05023 -2. 

12. Aung, T.N., Monkman, J., Warrell, J., Vathiotis, I., Bates, K.M., Gavrielatou, N., Trontzas, I.P., Tan, 

C.W., Fernandez, A.I., Moutafi, M., et al. (2025). Spatial signatures for predicting immunotherapy 

outcomes using multi -omics in non -small cell lung can cer. Nat Genet 57 , 2482 -2493. 

10.1038/s41588 -025 -02351 -7. 

13. Risom, T., Glass, D.R., Averbukh, I., Liu, C.C., Baranski, A., Kagel, A., McCaffrey, E.F., Greenwald, 

N.F., Rivero -Gutiérrez, B., Strand, S.H., et al. (2022). Transition to invasive breast cancer is 

associated with progressive changes in the structure and composition of tumor stroma. Cell 185 , 299 -

310.e218. 10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.023. 

14. Liu, Y., Sinjab, A., Min, J., Han, G., Paradiso, F., Zhang, Y., Wang, R., Pei, G., Dai, Y., Liu, Y., et al. 

(2025). Conserved spatial subtypes and cellular neighborhoods of cancer -associated fibroblasts 

revealed by single -cell spatial multi -omics. Cancer Cell 43 , 905 -924.e906. 

10.1016/j.ccell.2025.03.004. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 68

15. Peng, F., Sinjab, A., Dai, Y., Treekitkarnmongkol, W., Yang, S., Gomez Bolanos, L.I., Zhou, T., Chen, 

M., Serrano, A.G., Krishna, A., et al. (2026). Multimodal spatial -omics reveal co -evolution of alveolar 

progenitors and proinflammatory niches in progress ion of lung precursor lesions. Cancer Cell 44 , 321 -

339 e313. 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.10.004. 

16. Engblom, C., Thrane, K., Lin, Q., Andersson, A., Toosi, H., Chen, X., Steiner, E., Lu, C., Mantovani, 

G., Hagemann -Jensen, M., et al. (2023). Spatial transcriptomics of B cell and T cell receptors reveals 

lymphocyte clonal dynamics. Science 382 , eadf8486. 10.1126/science.adf8486. 

17. Moses, L., and Pachter, L. (2022). Museum of spatial transcriptomics. Nature Methods 19 , 534 -546. 

10.1038/s41592 -022 -01409 -2. 

18. Li, Y., Ding, Y., Dennis, S., Hutch, M.R., Zhou, J., Zhou, Y., Li, Y., Pillai, M., Ghotbaldini, S., Garcia, 

M.A., et al. (2025). SOAR elucidates biological insights and empowers drug discovery through spatial 

transcriptomics. Science Advances 11 , eadt7450. doi:10.1126/sciadv.adt7450. 

19. Cui, H.T., Tejada -Lapuerta, A., Brbic, M., Saez -Rodriguez, J., Cristea, S., Goodarzi, H., Lotfollahi, M., 

Theis, F.J., and Wang, B. (2025). Towards multimodal foundation models in molecular cell biology. 

Nature 640 , 623 -633. 10.1038/s41586 -025 -08710 -y. 

20. Moor, M., Banerjee, O., Abad, Z.S.H., Krumholz, H.M., Leskovec, J., Topol, E.J., and Rajpurkar, P. 

(2023). Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelligence. Nature 616 , 259 -265. 

10.1038/s41586 -023 -05881 -4. 

21. Rood, J.E., Wynne, S., Robson, L., Hupalowska, A., Randell, J., Teichmann, S.A., and Regev, A. 

(2025). The Human Cell Atlas from a cell census to a unified foundation model. Nature 637 , 1065 -

1071. 10.1038/s41586 -024 -08338 -4. 

22. Lipkova, J., and Kather, J.N. (2024). The age of foundation models. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 21 , 769 -770. 

10.1038/s41571 -024 -00941 -8. 

23. Chen, R.J., Ding, T., Lu, M.Y., Williamson, D.F.K., Jaume, G., Song, A.H., Chen, B., Zhang, A., Shao, 

D., Shaban, M., et al. (2024). Towards a general -purpose foundation model for computational 

pathology. Nat Med 30 , 850 -862. 10.1038/s41591 -024 -02857 -3. 

24. Wang, X., Zhao, J., Marostica, E., Yuan, W., Jin, J., Zhang, J., Li, R., Tang, H., Wang, K., Li, Y., et al. 

(2024). A pathology foundation model for cancer diagnosis and prognosis prediction. Nature 634 ,

970 -978. 10.1038/s41586 -024 -07894 -z. 

25. Salmén, F., Ståhl, P.L., Mollbrink, A., Navarro, J.F., Vickovic, S., Frisén, J., and Lundeberg, J. (2018). 

Barcoded solid -phase RNA capture for Spatial Transcriptomics profiling in mammalian tissue sections. 

Nature Protocols. 10.1038/s41596 -018 -0045 -2. 

26. Oliveira, M.F.d., Romero, J.P., Chung, M., and Williams, S.R. (2025). High -definition spatial 

transcriptomic profiling of immune cell populations in colorectal cancer. Nature Genetics 57 , 1512 -

1523. 10.1038/s41588 -025 -02193 -3. 

27. Schott, M., León -Periñán, D., Splendiani, E., Strenger, L., Licha, J.R., Pentimalli, T.M., Schallenberg, 

S., Alles, J., Samut Tagliaferro, S., Boltengagen, A., et al. (2024). Open -ST: High -resolution spatial 

transcriptomics in 3D. Cell 187 , 3953 -3972.e3926. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.05.055. 

28. Poovathingal, S., Davie, K., Borm, L.E., Vandepoel, R., Poulvellarie, N., Verfaillie, A., Corthout, N., 

and Aerts, S. (2024). Nova ‑ST: Nano ‑patterned ultra ‑dense platform for spatial transcriptomics. Cell 

Reports Methods 4, 100831. 10.1016/j.crmeth.2024.100831. 

29. Cho, C. -S., Xi, J., Si, Y., Park, S. -R., Hsu, J. -E., Kim, M., Jun, G., Kang, H.M., and Lee, J.H. (2021). 

Microscopic examination of spatial transcriptome using Seq -Scope. Cell 184 , 3559 -3572.e3522. 

10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.010. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 69

30. Chen, A., Liao, S., Cheng, M., Ma, K., Wu, L., Lai, Y., Qiu, X., Yang, J., Xu, J., Hao, S., et al. (2022). 

Spatiotemporal transcriptomic atlas of mouse organogenesis using DNA nanoball -patterned arrays. 

Cell 185 , 1777 -1792 e1721. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.003. 

31. Theodoris, C.V., Xiao, L., Chopra, A., Chaffin, M.D., Al Sayed, Z.R., Hill, M.C., Mantineo, H., Brydon, 

E.M., Zeng, Z., Liu, X.S., and Ellinor, P.T. (2023). Transfer learning enables predictions in network 

biology. Nature 618 , 616 -624. 10.1038/s41586 -023 -06139 -9. 

32. Land, E.H. (1977). The Retinex Theory of Color Vision. Scientific American 237 , 108 -128. 

10.1038/scientificamerican1277 -108. 

33. Jaume, G., Doucet, P., Song, A.H., Lu, M.Y., Almagro -Pérez, C., Wagner, S.J., Vaidya, A.J., Chen, 

R.J., Williamson, D.F.K., Kim, A., and Mahmood, F. (2024). HEST -1k: A Dataset for Spatial 

Transcriptomics and Histology Image Analysis. 2024/06/23.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16192 .

34. Chen, J., Zhou, M., Wu, W., Zhang, J., Li, Y., and Li, D. (2024). STimage -1K4M: A histopathology 

image -gene expression dataset for spatial transcriptomics. 2024/06/10. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06393 .

35. Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y., and Manzagol, P. -A. (2008). Extracting and composing robust 

features with denoising autoencoders. held in Helsinki, Finland, 2008/07. pp. 1096 -1103. 

36. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R. (2022). Masked Autoencoders Are 

Scalable Vision Learners. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR), 16000 -16009. 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01554. 

37. Bao, H., Wang, W., Dong, L., Liu, Q., Mohammed, O., Piao, S., Wang, L., Gao, J., and Wei, F. Image 

as a Foreign Language: BEiT Pretraining for Vision and Vision -Language Tasks. held in New 

Orleans, LA, USA, 2022. (IEEE), pp. 19175 -19186. 

38. Wu, K., Peng, H., Chen, M., Fu, J., and Chao, H. (2021). Rethinking and Improving Relative Position 

Encoding for Vision Transformer. 2021/10. 

39. Dehghani, M., Mustafa, B., Djolonga, J., Heek, J., Minderer, M., Caron, M., Steiner, A., Puigcerver, 

J., Geirhos, R., Alabdulmohsin, I.M., and et al. (2024). Patch n'Pack: NaViT, a Vision Transformer for 

Any Aspect Ratio and Resolution. 

40. Song, A.H., Jaume, G., Williamson, D.F.K., Lu, M.Y., Vaidya, A., Miller, T.R., and Mahmood, F. (2023). 

Artificial intelligence for digital and computational pathology. Nature Reviews Bioengineering 1, 930 -

949. 10.1038/s44222 -023 -00096 -8. 

41. Zhang, D., Schroeder, A., Yan, H., Yang, H., Hu, J., Lee, M.Y.Y., Cho, K.S., Susztak, K., Xu, G.X., 

Feldman, M.D., et al. (2024). Inferring super -resolution tissue architecture by integrating spatial 

transcriptomics with histology. Nature Biotechnology 42 , 1372 -1377. 10.1038/s41587 -023 -02019 -9. 

42. Ren, P., Zhang, R., Wang, Y., Zhang, P., Luo, C., Wang, S., Li, X., Zhang, Z., Zhao, Y., He, Y., et al. 

(2025). Systematic benchmarking of high -throughput subcellular spatial transcriptomics platforms 

across human tumors. Nat Commun 16 , 9232. 10.1038/s41467 -025 -64292 -3. 

43. He, B., Bergenstråhle, L., Stenbeck, L., Abid, A., Andersson, A., Borg, Å., Maaskola, J., Lundeberg, 

J., and Zou, J. (2020). Integrating spatial gene expression and breast tumour morphology via deep 

learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering 4, 827 -834. 10.1038/s41551 -020 -0578 -x. 

44. Yang, Y., Hossain, M.Z., Stone, E.A., and Rahman, S. (2023). Exemplar Guided Deep Neural Network 

for Spatial Transcriptomics Analysis of Gene Expression Prediction. 2023 IEEE/CVF Winter 

Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). IEEE. 

45. Zeng, Y., Wei, Z., Yu, W., Yin, R., Yuan, Y., Li, B., Tang, Z., Lu, Y., and Yang, Y. (2022). Spatial 

transcriptomics prediction from histology jointly through Transformer and graph neural networks. Brief 

Bioinform 23 . 10.1093/bib/bbac297. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 70

46. Wang, C., Chan, A.S., Fu, X., Ghazanfar, S., Kim, J., Patrick, E., and Yang, J.Y.H. (2025). 

Benchmarking the translational potential of spatial gene expression prediction from histology. Nat 

Commun 16 , 1544. 10.1038/s41467 -025 -56618 -y. 

47. Hoang, D.T., Dinstag, G., Shulman, E.D., Hermida, L.C., Ben -Zvi, D.S., Elis, E., Caley, K., Sammut, 

S.J., Sinha, S., Sinha, N., et al. (2024). A deep -learning framework to predict cancer treatment 

response from histopathology images through imputed transcr iptomics. Nat Cancer 5, 1305 -1317. 

10.1038/s43018 -024 -00793 -2. 

48. Shulman, E.D., Campagnolo, E.M., Lodha, R., Chung, Y., Stemmer, A., Cantore, T., Ru, B., Chang, 

T.G., Biswas, S., Dhruba, S.R., et al. (2026). AI -predicted spatial transcriptomics unlocks breast 

cancer biomarkers from pathology. Cell. 10.1016/j.cell.2026.0 4.023. 

49. Loeffler, C., and Kather, J.N. (2021). Manual tumor annotations in TCGA (v0.1). (Zenodo). 

10.5281/zenodo.5320076. 

50. Liu, C., Zhang, M., Yan, X., Ni, Y., Gong, Y., Wang, C., Zhang, X., Wan, L., Yang, H., Ge, C., et al. 

(2023). Single -cell dissection of cellular and molecular features underlying human cervical squamous 

cell carcinoma initiation and progression. Science Ad vances 9, eadd8977. 10.1126/sciadv.add8977. 

51. Litwin, T.R., Irvin, S.R., Chornock, R.L., Sahasrabuddhe, V.V., Stanley, M., and Wentzensen, N. 

(2021). Infiltrating T -cell markers in cervical carcinogenesis: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 

British Journal of Cancer 124 , 831 -841. 10.1038/s41416 -020 -01184 -x. 

52. Rao, A. (2021). Exploring tissue architecture using spatial transcriptomics. Nature 596 , 211 -220. 

10.1038/s41586 -021 -03634 -9. 

53. Long, Y., Ang, K.S., Sethi, R., Liao, S., Heng, Y., van Olst, L., Ye, S., Zhong, C., Xu, H., Zhang, D., 

et al. (2024). Deciphering spatial domains from spatial multi -omics with SpatialGlue. Nature Methods 

21 , 1658 -1667. 10.1038/s41592 -024 -02316 -4. 

54. Coleman, K., Schroeder, A., Loth, M., Zhang, D., Park, J.H., Sung, J.Y., Blank, N., Cowan, A.J., Qian, 

X., Chen, J., et al. (2025). Resolving tissue complexity by multimodal spatial omics modeling with 

MISO. Nature Methods 22 , 530 -538. 10.1038/s41592 -024 -02574 -2. 

55. De Zuani, M., Xue, H., Park, J.S., Dentro, S.C., Seferbekova, Z., Tessier, J., Curras -Alonso, S., 

Hadjipanayis, A., Athanasiadis, E.I., Gerstung, M., et al. (2024). Single -cell and spatial transcriptomics 

analysis of non -small cell lung cancer. Nature Com munications 15 , 4388. 10.1038/s41467 -024 -

48700 -8. 

56. Subramanian, A., Nemat -Gorgani, N., Ellis -Caleo, T.J., van Ijzendoorn, D.G.P., Sears, T.J., Somani, 

A., Luca, B.A., Zhou, M.Y., Bradic, M., Torres, I.A., et al. (2024). Sarcoma microenvironment cell 

states and ecosystems are associated with prognosis and p redict response to immunotherapy. Nature 

Cancer 5, 642 -658. 10.1038/s43018 -024 -00743 -y. 

57. Kumar, T., Nee, K., Wei, R., He, S., and et al. (2023). A spatially resolved single -cell genomic atlas 

of the adult human breast. Nature 620 , 181 -191. 10.1038/s41586 -023 -06350 -y. 

58. Deshpande, A., Loth, M., Sidiropoulos, D.N., Zhang, S., and et al. (2023). Uncovering the spatial 

landscape of molecular interactions within the tumor microenvironment through latent spaces. Cell 

Systems 14 , 722. 10.1016/j.cels.2023.07.006 PMID - 37591207. 

59. Zhang, S., Yuan, L., Danilova, L., Mo, G., and et al. (2023). Spatial transcriptomics analysis of 

neoadjuvant cabozantinib and nivolumab in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma identifies 

independent mechanisms of resistance and recurrence. Genome Medicine. 1 0.1186/s13073 -023 -

01212 -6. 

60. Guo, C., Qu, X., Tang, X., Song, Y., and et al. (2023). Spatiotemporally deciphering the mysterious 

mechanism of persistent HPV -induced malignant transition and immune remodelling from HPV -

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 71

infected normal cervix, precancer to cervical cancer: Integrating single -cell RNA -sequencing and 

spatial transcriptome. Clinical and Translational Medicine 13 , e1219. 10.1002/ctm2.1219 PMID -

36967539. 

61. Yang, Y.M., Liu, Q., Luo, J., Qi, Z.Y., Li, S.S., Shen, L., Li, J.S., Fang, X.N., Huang, J., Liu, B.L., et al. 

(2025). SOX4 -ZIP14 -zinc metabolism mediates oncogenesis and suppresses T cell immunity in 

nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cell Reports Medicine 6. ARTN 102300 

10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102300. 

62. Wolf, F.A., Angerer, P., and Theis, F.J. (2018). SCANPY: large -scale single -cell gene expression data 

analysis. Genome Biol 19 , 15. 10.1186/s13059 -017 -1382 -0. 

63. Bleriot, C., Dunsmore, G., Alonso -Curbelo, D., and Ginhoux, F. (2024). A temporal perspective for 

tumor -associated macrophage identities and functions. Cancer Cell 42 , 747 -758. 

10.1016/j.ccell.2024.04.002. 

64. Molgora, M., Liu, Y.A., Colonna, M., and Cella, M. (2023). TREM2: A new player in the tumor 

microenvironment. Semin Immunol 67 , 101739. 10.1016/j.smim.2023.101739. 

65. Pederzoli, F., Raffo, M., Pakula, H., Ravera, F., Nuzzo, P.V., and Loda, M. (2023). "Stromal cells in 

prostate cancer pathobiology: friends or foes?". Br J Cancer 128 , 930 -939. 10.1038/s41416 -022 -

02085 -x. 

66. Adrover, J.M., Han, X., Sun, L., Fujii, T., Sivetz, N., Dassler -Plenker, J., Evans, C., Peters, J., He, 

X.Y., Cannon, C.D., et al. (2025). Neutrophils drive vascular occlusion, tumour necrosis and 

metastasis. Nature 645 , 484 -495. 10.1038/s41586 -025 -09278 -3. 

67. Liao, T., Zeng, Y., Xu, W., Shi, X., Shen, C., Du, Y., Zhang, M., Zhang, Y., Li, L., and Ding, P. (2025). 

A spatially resolved transcriptome landscape during thyroid cancer progression. Cell Reports 

Medicine 6, 102043. 10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102043. 

68. Siegel, R.L., Kratzer, T.B., Giaquinto, A.N., Sung, H., and Jemal, A. (2025). Cancer statistics, 2025. 

CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 75 , 10 -45. 10.3322/caac.21871. 

69. Nolan, E., Lindeman, G.J., and Visvader, J.E. (2023). Deciphering breast cancer: from biology to the 

clinic. Cell 186 , 1708 -1728. 10.1016/j.cell.2023.01.040. 

70. Weigelt, B., Eberle, C., Cowell, C.F., Ng, C.K.Y., and Reis -Filho, J.S. (2014). Metaplastic breast 

carcinoma: More than a special type. Nature Reviews Cancer 14 , 147 -148. 10.1038/nrc3637. 

71. Korsunsky, I., Millard, N., Fan, J., Slowikowski, K., Zhang, F., Wei, K., Baglaenko, Y., Brenner, M., 

Loh, P. -R., and Raychaudhuri, S. (2019). Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single -cell data 

with Harmony. Nature Methods 16 , 1289 -1296. 10.1038/s41592 -019 -0619 -0. 

72. Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M.B., Jordan, M.I., and Yosef, N. (2018). Deep generative modeling for 

single -cell transcriptomics. Nature Methods 15 , 1053 -1058. 10.1038/s41592 -018 -0229 -2. 

73. Hazan, R.B., Phillips, G.R., Qiao, R.F., Norton, L., and Aaronson, S.A. (2000). Exogenous expression 

of N -cadherin in breast cancer cells induces cell migration, invasion, and metastasis. J Cell Biol 148 ,

779 -790. 10.1083/jcb.148.4.779. 

74. Khilko, N., Wang, J., Wei, B., Hicks, D.G., and Tang, P. (2010). Invasive Lobular Carcinomas Do Not 

Express Basal Cytokeratin Markers CK5/6, CK14 and CK17. Breast Cancer (Auckl) 4, 49 -55. 

10.4137/BCBCR.S5037. 

75. Haghverdi, L., Büttner, M., Wolf, F.A., Buettner, F., and Theis, F.J. (2016). Diffusion pseudotime 

robustly reconstructs lineage branching. Nature Methods 13 , 845 -848. 10.1038/nmeth.3971. 

76. Reddy, T.P., Rosato, R.R., Li, X., Moulder, S., Piwnica -Worms, H., and Chang, J.C. (2020). A 

comprehensive overview of metaplastic breast cancer: clinical features and molecular aberrations. 

Breast Cancer Res 22 , 121. 10.1186/s13058 -020 -01353 -z. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 72

77. Zagami, P., and Carey, L.A. (2022). Triple negative breast cancer: Pitfalls and progress. NPJ Breast 

Cancer 8, 95. 10.1038/s41523 -022 -00468 -0. 

78. Gendoo, D.M.A., Ratanasirigulchai, N., Schröder, M.S., Paré, L., Parker, J.S., Prat, A., and Haibe -

Kains, B. (2016). genefu: an R/Bioconductor package for computation of gene expression -based 

signatures in breast cancer. Bioinformatics 32 , 1097 -1099. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv693. 

79. Xu, T., Lin, S., Wu, Y., He, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhao, Y., Zhang, P., Zhao, L., Yang, W., Ye, M., et al. (2025). 

Integrative spatial multi -omics reveals prognostic tumor niches in female genital tumors. 

10.1101/2025.11.24.690313. 

80. Hoffmann, A. (2025). NF -κB: master regulator of cellular responses in health and disease. Immunity 

& Inflammation 1. 10.1007/s44466 -025 -00014 -0. 

81. Taniguchi, K., and Karin, M. (2018). NF -κB, inflammation, immunity and cancer: Coming of age. 

Nature Reviews Immunology 18 , 309 -324. 10.1038/nri.2017.142. 

82. Zhou, H., Wertz, I., O'Rourke, K., Ultsch, M., Seshagiri, S., Eby, M., Xiao, W., and Dixit, V.M. (2004). 

Bcl10 activates the NF -kappaB pathway through ubiquitination of NEMO. Nature 427 , 167 -171. 

10.1038/nature02273. 

83. Hörst, F., Rempe, M., Becker, H., Heine, L., Keyl, J., and Kleesiek, J. (2025). CellViT++: Energy -

Efficient and Adaptive Cell Segmentation and Classification Using Foundation Models. 

84. Vorontsov, E., Bozkurt, A., Casson, A., Shaikovski, G., Zelechowski, M., Severson, K., Zimmermann, 

E., Hall, J., Tenenholtz, N., Fusi, N., et al. (2024). A foundation model for clinical -grade computational 

pathology and rare cancers detection. Nat Med 30 , 2924 -2935. 10.1038/s41591 -024 -03141 -0. 

85. Huang, Z., Bianchi, F., Yuksekgonul, M., Montine, T.J., and Zou, J. (2023). A visual –language 

foundation model for pathology image analysis using medical Twitter. Nature Medicine 29 , 2307 -2316. 

10.1038/s41591 -023 -02504 -3. 

86. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N. (2017). Integrated genomic and molecular characterization 

of cervical cancer. Nature 543 , 378 -384. 10.1038/nature21386. 

87. Richardson, D.L., Eskander, R.N., and O'Malley, D.M. (2023). Advances in Ovarian Cancer Care and 

Unmet Treatment Needs for Patients With Platinum Resistance: A Narrative Review. JAMA Oncol 9,

851 -859. 10.1001/jamaoncol.2023.0197. 

88. Salmi, M., Atif, D., Oliva, D., Abraham, A., and Ventura, S. (2024). Handling imbalanced medical 

datasets: review of a decade of research. Artif Intell Rev 57 . ARTN 273 

10.1007/s10462 -024 -10884 -2. 

89. Valanarasu, J.M.J., Xu, H., Usuyama, N., Kim, C., Wong, C., Argaw, P., Ben Shimol, R., Crabtree, A., 

Matlock, K., Bartlett, A.Q., et al. (2026). Multimodal AI generates virtual population for tumor 

microenvironment modeling. Cell 189 , 386 -400 e319. 10.1016/j.cell.2025.11.016. 

90. Richards, C.H., Mohammed, Z., Qayyum, T., Horgan, P.G., and McMillan, D.C. (2011). The 

prognostic value of histological tumor necrosis in solid organ malignant disease: a systematic review. 

Future Oncol 7, 1223 -1235. 10.2217/fon.11.99. 

91. Yang, J., Zheng, Z., Jiao, Y., Yu, K., Bhatara, S., Yang, X., Natarajan, S., Zhang, J., Pan, Q., Easton, 

J., et al. (2025). Spotiphy enables single -cell spatial whole transcriptomics across an entire section. 

Nature Methods 22 , 724 -736. 10.1038/s41592 -025 -02622 -5. 

92. Hu, B., He, R., Pang, K., Wang, G., Wang, N., Zhu, W., Sui, X., Teng, H., Liu, T., Zhu, J., et al. (2025). 

High -resolution spatially resolved proteomics of complex tissues based on microfluidics and transfer 

learning. Cell 188 , 734 -748 e722. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.12.023. 

93. Rood, J.E., Maartens, A., Hupalowska, A., Teichmann, S.A., and Regev, A. (2022). Impact of the 

Human Cell Atlas on medicine. Nature Medicine 28 , 2486 -2496. 10.1038/s41591 -022 -02104 -7. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint 73

94. Gong, D., Arbesfeld -Qiu, J.M., Perrault, E., Bae, J.W., and Hwang, W.L. (2024). Spatial oncology: 

Translating contextual biology to the clinic. Cancer Cell 42 , 1653 -1675. 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.09.001. 

95. Kuehl, M., Okabayashi, Y., Wong, M.N., Gernhold, L., Gut, G., Kaiser, N., Schwerk, M., Gräfe, S.K., 

Ma, F.Y., Tanevski, J., et al. (2025). Pathology -oriented multiplexing enables integrative disease 

mapping. Nature 644 , 516 -526. 10.1038/s41586 -025 -09225 -2. 

96. Gandin, V., Kim, J., Yang, L.Z., Lian, Y., Kawase, T., Hu, A., Rokicki, K., Fleishman, G., Tillberg, P., 

Castrejon, A.A., et al. (2025). Deep -tissue transcriptomics and subcellular imaging at high spatial 

resolution. Science 388 , eadq2084. 10.1126/science.adq2084. 

97. Sui, X., Lo, J.A., Luo, S., He, Y., Tang, Z., Lin, Z., Barabasi, D.L., Zhou, Y., Wang, W.X., Liu, J., and 

Wang, X. (2025). Scalable spatial single -cell transcriptomics and translatomics in 3D thick tissue 

blocks. Nat Methods 22 , 2574 -2584. 10.1038/s41592 -025 -02867 -0. 

98. Enninful, A., Zhang, Z., Klymyshyn, D., Ingalls, M., Yang, M., Zong, H., Bai, Z., Farzad, N., Su, G., 

Baysoy, A., et al. (2026). Integration of imaging -based and sequencing -based spatial omics mapping 

on the same tissue section via DBiTplus. Nat Methods. 10.1038/s41592 -025 -02948 -0. 

99. Li, Z., Li, Y., Xiang, J., Wang, X., Yang, S., Zhang, X., Eweje, F., Chen, Y., Luo, X., Li, Y., et al. (2026). 

AI -enabled virtual spatial proteomics from histopathology for interpretable biomarker discovery in lung 

cancer. Nat Med 32 , 231 -244. 10.1038/s41591 -025 -04060 -4. 

100. Liu, T., Huang, T., Ding, T., Wu, H., Humphrey, P., Perincheri, S., Schalper, K., Ying, R., Xu, H., Zou, 

J., et al. (2026). Leveraging multi -modal foundation models for analysing spatial multi -omic and 

histopathology data. Nat Biomed Eng. 10.1038/s41551 -02 5-01602 -6. 

101. Steyaert, S., Pizurica, M., Nagaraj, D., Khandelwal, P., Hernandez -Boussard, T., Gentles, A.J., and 

Gevaert, O. (2023). Multimodal data fusion for cancer biomarker discovery with deep learning. Nature 

Machine Intelligence 5, 351 -362. 10.1038/s42256 -023 -00633 -5. 

102. Truhn, D., Azizi, S., Zou, J., Cerda -Alberich, L., Mahmood, F., and Kather, J.N. (2026). Artificial 

intelligence agents in cancer research and oncology. Nat Rev Cancer. 10.1038/s41568 -025 -00900 -

0. 

103. Xu, T., Lin, S., Wu, Y., He, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhao, Y., Zhang, P., Zhao, L., Yang, W., Ye, M., et al. (2025). 

Integrative spatial multi -omics reveals prognostic tumor niches in female genital tumors. bioRxiv, 

2025.2011.2024.690313. 10.1101/2025.11.24.690313 .

104. Otsu, N. (1975). A threshold selection method from gray -level histograms. Automatica 11 , 285 -296. 

105. Dunning, T., and Ertl, O. (2019). Computing extremely accurate quantiles using t -digests. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1902.04023. 

106. Lin, S., Cui, Y., Zhao, F., Yang, Z., Song, J., Yao, J., Zhao, Y., Qian, B. -Z., Zhao, Y., and Yuan, Z. 

(2024). Complete spatially resolved gene expression is not necessary for identifying spatial domains. 

Cell Genomics 4.

107. Land, E.H. (1977). The retinex theory of color vision. Scientific american 237 , 108 -129. 

108. Akenine -Moller, T., Haines, E., and Hoffman, N. (2019). Real -time rendering (AK Peters/crc Press). 

109. Heimberg, G., Kuo, T., DePianto, D.J., Salem, O., Heigl, T., Diamant, N., Scalia, G., Biancalani, T., 

Turley, S.J., Rock, J.R., et al. (2024). A cell atlas foundation model for scalable search of similar 

human cells. Nature 638 , 1085 -1094. 10.1038/s41586 -024 -08411 -y. 

110. Balestriero, R., Ibrahim, M., Sobal, V., Morcos, A., Shekhar, S., Goldstein, T., Bordes, F., Bardes, A., 

Mialon, G., and Tian, Y. (2023). A cookbook of self -supervised learning. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2304.12210. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.01.729028 doi: bioRxiv preprint

74 

111. Chen, H., Li, D., and Bar -Joseph, Z. (2023). Subcellular spatial transcriptomics cell segmentation 

(SCS): cell segmentation for high -resolution spatial transcriptomics. Nature Methods 20 , 1237 -1243. 

10.1038/s41592 -023 -01939 -3. 

112. Girshick, R. (2015). Fast r -cnn. pp. 1440 -1448. 

113. Ilse, M., Tomczak, J.M., and Welling, M. (2018). Attention -based Deep Multiple Instance Learning. 

pp. 2127 -2136. 

114. Katzman, J.L., Shaham, U., Cloninger, A., Bates, J., Jiang, T., and Kluger, Y. (2018). DeepSurv: 

personalized treatment recommender system using a Cox proportional hazards deep neural network. 

BMC Medical Research Methodology 18 , 24. 10.1186/s12874 -018 -0482 -1. 

115. Lausen, B., and Schumacher, M. (1992). Maximally selected rank statistics. Biometrics, 73 -85. 

116. Lu, M.Y., Williamson, D.F.K., Chen, T.Y., Chen, R.J., Barbieri, M., and Mahmood, F. (2021). Data -

efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole -slide images. Nat Biomed Eng 5,

555 -570. 10.1038/s41551 -020 -00682 -w.